thumb|House of the Black MadonnaLa '''Maison à la Vierge noire''' (''Dům U černé matky Boží'') est un batiment cubiste dans la Vieille Ville de Prague en Tchéquie. Elle est l'œuvre de l'architecte Josef Gočár qui l'a construite entre 1911 et 1912 pour le marchand Frantisek Josef Herbst. Elle a été concue pour accueillir son magasin au rez de chaussée et au deuxième étage tandis que le premier étage était occupé par le Grand Café Orient. La maison sert de nos jours d'annexe à la Galerie nationale à Prague pour ses expositions permanente et temporaires sur le cubisme après avoir été conçue comme grand magasin.

Située sur la « voie royale », elle tire son nom de la vierge noire qui orne un angle du batiment et provient d'un des batiments baroques situés auparavant à l'emplacement de la maison. Il s'agit d'une copie, la statue originale est conservée dans la maison à la cloche en pierre sur la Place de la Vieille-Ville. 

== Articles connexes ==
* Prague cubiste
* Vierge noire

thumb|House of the Black Madonna
The '''House of the Black Madonna''' is a Old Town" area of Prague, Czech republic. It was designed by Josef Gočár. It is currently in use as a small museum of Cubism and is open to the public.

The House of the Black Madonna (U Cerne Matky Bozi), sometimes referred to as Black Mother of the Lord, was designed and built between 1911 and 1912 on the corner of Celetna Street and Ovocny trh. Josef Gocar built this house as the first example of cubist architecture in Prague and it remains probably the most celebrated. Even without historical details of the Baroque building surrounding it, the House at the Black Madonna maintains the atmosphere of the neighborhood. The house was given its name by the stone sculpture that originally adorned one of the two Baroque buildings on the same lot. After many years altered use in the interwar period and under communist rule, the house was closed in January 2002 and re-opened after extensive restoration in November 2003.

	Gocar designed this house in mid-1911 at the age of 31 for the wholesale merchant Frantisek Josef Herbst. Mr. Herbst chose Gocar to build his department store in Old Town along the old coronation route because of the architect’s earlier success with a similar shop in Jaromer(sp) build in 1909-1911. Because of this prominent position within the heart of the city, Gocar’s building was subject to strict harmonization rules that demanded the department store not conflict with its historical setting. It uses the language of baroque architecture in the cubist forms which exemplifies the ‘contextualization’ of cubist architecture. 

	Gocar’s first plans were not well received by Lubos Jeabek who oversaw the historical-buildings authority in Bohemia. Subsequent designs incorporated more cubist features into the building; the Prague City Council eventually approved the plans on August 4th, 1911. In fact, his early modernist orientation, seen in original plans for the House at the Black Madonna, give way to the new cubist designs in the finished building. The angulated bay windows, iconic capitals between windows, and cubist railing of the balcony took their place in deigns. 