A '''biography''' (from the Greek words ''bios'' meaning "life", and ''graphos'' meaning "write") is an account of a person's life, usually published in the form of a book or essay, or in some other form, such as a film.  An autobiography (''auto'', meaning "self", giving ''self-biography'') is a biography by the same person it is about.  A biography is more than a list of impersonal facts (like birth, education, work, relationships and death), it also portrays the subject's experience of those events.  Unlike a profile or curriculum vitae (resume), a biography presents the subject's story, highlighting various aspects of his or her life, including intimate details of experiences, and may include an analysis of the subject's personality.

A work is biographical if it covers all of a person's life. As such, biographical works are usually non-fiction, but fiction can also be used to portray a person's life.  One in-depth form of biographical coverage is called media.

==Early forms==
The first known biographies were written by stone or cuneiform.

Perhaps the drawings in caves can be considered the first biographies. Some of them appear to relate events such as a successful hunt. The artists (biographers?) and viewers would know (by clues that escape us in the drawings) who was being honored.This also tells the accounts of a persons life.

==Classical forms==
Ancient Greeks developed the biographical tradition which we have inherited, although until the 5th century AD, when the word 'biographia' first appears, in Damascius' Life of Isodorus, biographical pieces were called simply "lives" (βιοι: "bioi").  It is quite likely that the Greeks were drawing on a pre-existing eastern tradition; certainly Herodotus' Histories contains more detailed biographical information on Persian kings and subjects than on anyone else, implying he had a Persian source for it.

The earliest surviving pieces which we would identify as biographical are Isocrates' Life of Evagoras and Xenophon's Life of Agesilaos, both from the fifth century BC.  Both identified themselves as encomia, or works of praise, and that biography was regarded as a discrete entity from historiography is evidenced by the fact that Xenophon treated King Agesilaos of Sparta twice in his works, once in the above-mentioned encomium and once in his Greek History; evidently the two genres were conceived as making different demands of authors who enrolled in them.  Xenophon could present his Cyropaedia, an account of the childhood of the Persian King Cyrus the Great now regarded as so fabulous that it falls rather into a novelistic tradition than a biographical one, as a serious work, without any disclaimers or caveats. 

Whereas Demetrius were paradigms of tyranny, Lysander and Sulla examples of great men degenerating into blood-thirsty corruption).  

However, although their moralising approach is not in fashion in the current intellectual climate, Greek biographies still have much to offer the modern reader, and for the most part it is reasonable to assume that while authors may have suppressed details which did not fall in with the general theme which they wished to convey, they are unlikely to have fabricated much.  Not least, they were instrumental in developing the modern idea of the person.  The traditional Greek attitude to individuals was to 'reduce them to types'; the Peripatetic tradition records various categories into which men might fall: the flatterer, the superstitious man and so on.  Greek rhetorical handbooks give advice on 'ethopoia', that is creating a character, one of a recognised type, to win favour in the law courts.  

The biographical tradition does draw on these types, but it also gives explicit recognition to the importance of individual ideosyncrasies in defining a man, and places the emphasis firmly on a man's personality rather than merely listing his accomplishments.  As Plutarch says in the introduction to his Life of Alexander the Great, 'in the most illustrious deeds there is not always a manifestation of virtue and vice, but a slight thing like a phrase or a jest often makes a greater revelation than battles where thousands fall, or the greatest armaments, or sieges of cities'.  Thus the individual is recognised as having some value and interest irrespective of the impact of his actions on the broader sweep of history. 

Under the Roman Empire, the biographical and historiographical traditions converged somewhat, likely due to the nature of government, whereby the state was dominated by a single emperor with totalitarian power and whose character and actions set the tone for the period; Tacitus's History and his Annals, as well as Dio's History contain much of the same material as the biographer Suetonius's Lives of the Twelve Caesars.  However, although Tacitus in particular was extremely critical of the regime, his disapproval emerges in subtle characterisation and arrangement of his material, in contrast with Suetonius' vicious authorial comment.

==Middle Ages and Renaissance==
The Early classical culture.  During this time, the only repositories of knowledge and records of early history in Europe was the popes and conversion to Christianity. See hagiography. One significant example of biography from this period which does not exactly fit into that mold is the life of Charlemagne as written by his courtier Einhard.

By the late Middle Ages, biographies became less church-oriented as biographies of kings, knights and tyrants began to appear.  The most famous of these such biographies was 'Le Morte d'Arthur' by Sir Thomas Malory.  The book was an account of the life of the fabled King Arthur and his Knights of the Round Table.

Following Malory, the new emphasis on humanism during the Renaissance promoted a focus on secular subjects such as artists and poets, and encouraged writing in the vernacular.
Giorgio Vasari's ''Lives of the Artists'' (1550) was a landmark biography focusing on secular lives. Vasari created celebrities of his subjects, as the ''Lives'' became an early "best seller."  Two other developments are noteworthy: the development of the printing press in the fifteenth century and the gradual increase in literacy.

Biographies in the English language began appearing during the reign of Henry VIII. John Foxe’s ''Acts and Monuments'' (1563), better known as Foxe's Book of Martyrs, essentially was the first dictionary of biography, followed by Thomas Fuller’s ''The History of the Worthies of England'' (1662), with a distinct focus on public life.

==Modern biography==
The "Golden Age" of English biography emerged in the late eighteenth century, the century in which the terms "biography" and "autobiography" entered the English lexicon. The classic works of the period were Samuel Johnson's ''Critic material and letting the subject "speak for itself." While Boswell compiled, Samuel Johnson composed. Johnson did not follow a chronological narration of the subject's life but used anecdotes and incidents selectively. Johnson rejected the notion that facts revealed truth. He suggested that biographers should seek their subject in "domestic privacies", to find little known facts or anecdotes which revealed character. (Casper, 1999)

The romantic biographers disputed many of Johnson's judgments. Jean Jacques Rousseau's ''Confessions'' (1781-88) exploited the romantic point of view and the confessional mode. The tradition of testimony and confession was brought to the New World by Puritan and Quaker memoirists and journal-keepers where the form continued to be influential. Benjamin Franklin's autobiography (1791) would provide the archetype for the American success story. (Stone, 1982)  Autobiography would remain an influential form of biographical writing.

Generally American biography followed the English model, while incorporating Thomas Carlyle's view that biography was a part of history. Carlyle asserted that the lives of great human beings were essential to understanding society and its institutions. While the historical impulse would remain a strong element in early American biography, American writers carved out their own distinct approach. What emerged was a rather didactic form of biography which sought to shape individual character of the reader in the process of defining national character. (Casper, 1999)

The distinction between mass biography and literary biography which had formed by the middle of the nineteenth century reflected a breach between high culture and middle-class culture. This division would endure for the remainder of the century. Biography began to flower thanks to new publishing technologies and an expanding reading public. This revolution in publishing made books available to a larger audience of readers. Almost ten times as many American biographies appeared from 1840 to 1860 than had appeared in the first two decades of the century. In addition, affordable paperback editions of popular biographies were published for the first time. Also, American periodicals began publishing series of biographical sketches.  (Casper, 1999) The topical emphasis shifted from republican heroes to self-made men and women.

Much of late 19th-century biography remained formulaic. Notably, few autobiographies had been written in the 19th century. The following century witnessed a renaissance of autobiography beginning with Booker T. Washington's, ''Up From Slavery'' (1901) and followed by Henry Adams' ''Education'' (1907), a chronicle of self-defined failure which ran counter to the predominant American success story. The publication of socially significant autobiographies by both men and women began to flourish. (Stone, 1982)

The authority of psychology and sociology was ascendant and would make its mark on the new century’s biographies. (Stone, 1982) The demise of the "great man" theory of history was indicative of the emerging mindset. Human behavior would be explained through Darwinian theories. "Sociological" biographies conceived of their subjects' actions as the result of the environment, and tended to downplay individuality. The development of psychoanalysis led to a more penetrating and comprehensive understanding of the biographical subject, and induced biographers to give more emphasis to childhood and adolescence. Clearly, psychological ideas were changing the way Americans read and wrote biographies, as a culture of autobiography developed in which the telling of one's own story became a form of therapy. (Casper, 1999)

The conventional concept of national heroes and narratives of success disappeared in the obsession with psychological explorations of personality. The new school of biography featured iconoclasts, scientific analysts, and fictional biographers. This wave included Lytton Strachey, André Maurois, and Emil Ludwig among others. Strachey's biographies had an influence similar to that which Samuel Johnson had enjoyed earlier. In the 1920s and '30s, biographical writers sought to capitalize on Strachey's popularity and imitate his style. Robert Graves (''I, Claudius'', 1934) stood out among those following Strachey's model of "debunking biographies." The trend in literary biography was accompanied in popular biography by a sort of "celebrity voyeurism." in the early decades of the century. This latter form's appeal to readers was based on curiosity more than morality or patriotism.

'''伝記'''（でんき）とは、'''広義'''には書き記された'''記録'''の総称だが、'''狭義'''には'''個人の事績の記録'''を指す。現代においては、狭義に使われることが多い。以下にそれぞれについて記す。

'''語源'''である中国語（中期漢語）としての伝記については'''伝'''（儒教における伝記）の記事を参照。

== 伝記（記録、文書） ==
'''伝記'''（でんき、しるしぶみ）とは、'''記録'''や'''文書'''のこと。または、古来伝わる事柄の記録。'''伝説'''・'''伝承'''を書き'''記'''したもの。古伝、'''伝'''とも言い、『烏丸鮮卑東夷伝』、『魏志倭人伝』のように記される。
「しるしぶみ」と読む場合、「'''文史'''（文学と史学のこと）」とも書く。

== 伝記（個人の事績の記録） ==
'''伝記'''（でんき）とは、前項のうち記録対象を個人に限定したもので、記録する行為自体も指す。ある特定の人物の生涯を、時間に沿って記述しながら、対象となる人間の性格や業績などをたどるもの。こちらも'''伝'''と略されることがあり、『○○（人物名）伝』のように記される。筆者が自身について書いたものは、特に'''自伝'''（自叙伝）という。

歴史的には、時代により、そのパターンや表現方法に大きな差が見られる。

中世ヨーロッパにおける聖人の物語や、罪人の物語なども広く伝記のルーツとして認められてはいるが、これらは道徳的要素が強く、現在的な意味で言う伝記とは趣を異なるものとしている。

中国の『史記』の中に「列伝」が設けられて歴代の紀伝体正史に引き継がれ、中国や古代日本において漢文による伝記が書かれた。日本におけるものは、後世の仮名交じり文による伝記と区別して特に'''漢文伝'''（かんぶんでん）と呼ぶ。

伝記の性質は時代につれ変わるものであり、心理学の発展はことに、伝記のあり方に大きな影響を与えた。

== 関連語句 ==
*本伝
:主となる伝記（記録や伝）のこと。外伝が存在する伝記に対して用いる。
*外伝
:本伝に対して、主たる部分や要点については不足するが、その補助となるような記録や注釈のこと。転じて、本伝において主たる部分ではない、何れかの部分に焦点を当てた記録や文書を指す。

てんき
てんき
てんき
てんき