thumb|Jeanne Baré en uniforme de marin.

Née le 27 juillet 1740 à La Comelle, '''Jeanne Barret''' est la première femme à faire le tour du monde.

Compagne du botaniste Philibert Commerson, elle se fait passer pour son valet, sous le nom de '''''Jean Baré''''' pour l'accompagner dans l'expédition dirigée par Bougainville en 1766, à une époque où il est hors de question d'embarquer une femme. Au cours du voyage, Commerson lui dédie un arbuste de la famille des ''Meliaceae'' : ''Baretia bonnafidia''. Néanmoins, la plante changera, par la suite, de nom pour devenir ''Turraea heterophylla''<ref>The ''International Plant Names Index'' ne répertorie par ailleurs aucun genre ''Baretia'' ou ''Barretia'', et par conséquent aucune espèce de ce genre potentiel.</ref>.

Leur supercherie est découverte à île Maurice, où il les débarque. Commerson y meurt en 1773. 

Jeanne se marie par la suite et rentre en France, bouclant ainsi son tour du monde. Elle y meurt en 1807.  Elle est enterrée au cimetière de l'église de Saint-Aulaye, située sur la commune de Saint-Antoine-de-Breuilh en Dordogne. 

thumb|Jeanne Baré in the uniform of a sailor.
'''Jeanne Baré''' (sometimes spelled '''Barret''' or '''Baret''') (La Boudeuse'' and ''Étoile'' in 1766&ndash;1769. Baré was probably the first woman to have completed a voyage of circumnavigation.   

Jeanne Baré joined the expedition disguised as a man, calling herself '''Jean Baré''' or '''Bonnefoy'''. She enlisted as naturalist, botanist who cheerfully accompanied Commerçon on the most troublesome excursions over rugged terrain and had a reputation for courage and strength.<ref name="nla"></ref>

Incredibly, Baré's true gender remained undetected by the entire company of the expedition until they reached Tahiti. As soon as she and Commerçon landed on shore to botanize, Baré was immediately surrounded by Tahitians who cried out that she was a woman. It was necessary to return her to the ship to protect her from the excited Tahitians. From this point on, Bougainville noted dryly, "it was difficult to prevent the sailors from alarming her modesty".

Baré told Bougainville that she was 26 or 27 years old, an orphan, and had been born in Burgundy. She had taken to disguising her gender after the loss of a lawsuit had left her in financial distress. She had previously served as a valet to a gentleman in Paris, and had joined Bougainville's expedition because the prospect of a voyage around the world had "raised her curiosity". Bougainville wrote in his account of the expedition that she would be the first woman to have completed such a voyage.