thumb|right|Ambroise Paré.
'''Ambroise Paré''' (Bourg-Hersent, Laval, 1509 - París, 1590) es considera el pare de la cirurgia moderna.

== Biografia ==

=== Paré, cirurgià real ===

Paré va ser Enic II, Francesc II, Carles IX i Enric III i de molts altres personatges cèlebres.

=== Formació en els camps de batalla === 

No va tenir una formació acadèmica, amb la qual cosa desconeixia el grec i el llatí, i va utilitzar el francès per a redactar les seves obres. 

Va estudiar en el gran hospital de París, l'Hôtel-Dieu, entre 1533 i 1536, participant, més endavant, com cirurgià militar a les campanyes d'Itàlia. En aquells dies va descobrir un "remei contra el dolor produït per armes de foc". Gran part de l'experiència de Paré va ser adquirida en els camps de batalla.

Conegut hugonot, es va lliurar de la mort a la matança de ''San Bartolomé'' gràcies a la protecció del rei Carles IX.

=== Aportacions de Paré a la medicina ===

L'any 1545 va publicar un tractat sobre el tractament de les ferides per arma de foc, ''Méthode de traiter les plaies faites par les arquebuts et autres bastons à feu, et celles qui sont faites par la poudre à canon'', considerat una joya de l'art quirúrgic. L'any 1553 va aparèixer una segona edició d'aquesta mateixa obra. L'any 1561 va publicar ''Anatomie universelle du corps humain''. Va escriure, a més, altres tractats i documents sobre el tractament de ferides i malalties i altres temes de orientació científica. 

thumb|200px|Ambroise Paré.
'''Ambroise Paré''' (born  in Bourg-Hersent, near Laval, surgeon. He was the great official royal surgeon for the kings Henry II, Francis II,  Charles IX and Henry III and is considered as one of the fathers of surgery. He was a leader in surgical techniques and battlefield medicine, especially the treatment of wounds. He was also an anatomist and the inventor of several surgical instruments.

==Biography==
After his apprenticeship at the Hôtel-Dieu in Paris between 1533 and 1536, Paré soon became a military surgeon during the campaigns in Italy. In this occasion, he discovered a ''remedy against the pain of the wounded by firearms''. Much of Paré's experience with wounds was acquired on the battlefield . 
In 1545 and 1553, he published the first and second editions of his treatise on the treatment of wounds by firearms and arrows, which is considered as milestone of surgical art. In 1561, Paré published his universal anatomy of the human body. Paré also published other scholarly treatises on the treatment of wounds and illnesses.

After a battle Ambroise Paré used egg yolk, oil of roses, and turpentine for war wounds instead of boiling oil. This was an ancient roman turpentine remedy. The following day, he observed that it was more efficient for healing wounds than the traditional boiling oil. The wounds were also less painful and weren't swollen.

Paré also introduced the ligature of arteries instead of cauterization during amputation. Although ligatures often spread infection, it still was an important breakthrough in surgical practice. During his work with injured soldiers, Paré documented the pain experienced by amputees which they perceive as sensation in the amputated limb. He believed that phantom pain occurred in the brain and are not the remnants of the limb, which is still the consensus of the medical community today.[http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2007/01/070118-phantom-limb.html]

Paré was also an important figure in the progress of obstetrics in the middle of the 16th century. He revived the operation of podalic version and showed how surgeons with this operation could often rescue an infant even in cases of head presentation, instead of breaking it up and extracting the infant piecemeal.

Paré was ably seconded by his pupil Jacques Guillemeau, who translated his work into Latin, and at a later period himself wrote a treatise on midwifery. An English translation of it was published in 1612 with the title ''Child Birth; or, The Happy Deliverie of Women''.

In 1552, Paré was accepted into royal service of the Henry II; he was however unable to cure the king's fatal blow to the head, which he received during a tournament in 1559.  Paré stayed in service of the Kings of France to the end of his life in 1590, serving Henri II, Francis II, Charles IX, and Henri III.

According to Henri IV's Prime Minister, Sully, Paré was a Huguenot and on August 24, 1572,the day of the St. Bartholomew's Day Massacre, Paré's life was saved when King Charles IX locked him in a clothes closet.  While there is evidence that Paré may have been sympathetic to the Huguenot cause, he was twice married, was buried, and had his children baptized into the Catholic faith.  