thumb|250px|''Phidias Showing the [[Frieze of the Sir Lawrence Alma-Tadema.]]

'''Phidias''' (or '''Pheidias'''; in c.ancient Greek sculptor, painter and architect, universally regarded as the greatest of all Classical sculptors.

Phidias designed the statues of the Athenian Acropolis (Athena Parthenos inside the Parthenon and the Athena Promachos) and the colossal seated Statue of Zeus at Olympia in the 5th century BC. The Athenian works were apparently commissioned by Pericles in 447 BC. Pericles used the money from the maritime League of Delos to pay Phidias for his work.

== Life ==
thumb|The ''[[Athena Parthenos'' signed by Antiochos, 1st century BC (Palazzo Altieri, Rome).]]

There are varying accounts of his training. Dorian schools is certainly to be traced in some of his work. 

Of his life we know little apart from his works. Pausanias, however, mentions two of his students, who also were his ''Nemesis at Elian youth and winner of the boy's wrestling match at the 86th Olympics in 436 BC. Pausanias<ref>Pausanias, V.11.3: "The figure of one binding his own head with a ribbon is said to resemble in appearance Pantarces, a stripling of Elis said to have been the love of Pheidias. Pantarces too won the wrestling-bout for boys at the eighty-sixth Festival." ''(ton de hauton tainiai tên kephalên anadoumenon eoikenai to eidos Pantarkei legousi, meirakion de Êleion ton Pantarkê paidika einai tou Pheidiou: aneileto de kai en paisin ho Pantarkês palês nikên Olumpiadi hektêi pros tais ogdoêkonta.)''</ref> reports a tradition that the boy was the model for one of the figures sculpted in the throne of the Olympian Zeus. Another tradition, reported by Clement of Alexandria, has Phidias carving "Kalos Pantarkes" ("Pantarkes is handsome") into the god's middle finger.<ref>Clement of Alexandria, ''Protrepticus'' Ch.IV; "The Athenian Phidias inscribed on the finger of the Olympian Jove, Pantarkes is beautiful. It was not Zeus that was beautiful in his eyes, but the man he loved."</ref> 

There are two divergent accounts of his death. According to Plutarch, he was made an object of attack by the political enemies of Pericles, and died in prison at Athens, but according to Philochorus, as quoted by a scholiast on Aristophanes, he fled to Elis, where he made the great statue of Zeus for the Eleans, but was afterwards put to death by them. For several reasons the first of these tales is preferable: it would not have been possible for him to have died in prison immediately after the creation of the Athena Parthenos on the Acropolis, as he made the Zeus of Olympia after his involvement with the Parthenon.

== Works ==
In his ''Life of Pericles'', Plutarch gives an account of the vast artistic activity which went on at Athens while that statesman was in power. Phidias used the money furnished by the Athenian allies for defence against Persia] instead on decorating Athens. It was very fortunate that after the time of Xerxes, Persia made no deliberate attempt against Greece. "In all these works," says Plutarch, "Phidias was the adviser and overseer of Pericles." Phidias introduced his own portrait and that of Pericles on the shield of his Athena Parthenos statue. And it was through Phidias that the political enemies of Pericles struck at him. It thus abundantly appears that Phidias was closely connected with Pericles, and a dominant spirit in the Athenian art of the period. But it is not easy to go beyond this general assertion into details.

It is important to observe that in resting the fame of Phidias upon the sculptures of the Parthenon we proceed with little evidence. In the antiquity he was celebrated for his statues in bronze, and his chryselephantine works (statues made of gold and ivory). Plutarch tells us that he superintended the great works of Pericles on the Acropolis, but this phrase is vague; inscriptions prove that the marble blocks intended for the pedimental statues of the Parthenon were not brought to Athens until 434 BC, which was probably after the death of Phidias. And there is a marked contrast in style between these statues and the certain works of Phidias. It is therefore probable that most if not all of the sculptural decoration of the Parthenon was the work of pupils of Phidias, such as Alcamenes and Agoracritus, rather than his own.

The earliest of the great works of Phidias were dedications in memory of Marathon, from the spoils of the victory. At Attic heroes, and Miltiades the general. On the acropolis of Athens he set up a colossal bronze statue of Athena, the Athena Promachos, which was visible far out at sea. At Pellene in Achaea, and at Plataea he made two other statues of Athena, as well as a statue of Aphrodite in ivory and gold for the people of Elis.

Among the ancient Greeks themselves two works of Phidias far outshone all others, and were the basis of his fame; the colossal chryselephantine figures in gold and ivory of Zeus at Olympia and of love of the sculptor for an Elian boy, Pantarkes. It was said that to honor his eromenos Phidias carved the boy's name on the little finger of the Olympian Zeus, and his portrait in the figure of a victorious athlete at the foot of the statue. (Plutarch, ''Erotikos''; Clement of Alexandria,  ''Protrepticus,''  53, 4) Of the Athena Parthenos two small copies in marble have been found at Athens which have no excellence of workmanship, but have a certain evidential value as to the treatment of their original.

'''Phidias''' (Griekse beeldhouwers.

== Biografie ==
Hij werd geboren te Athene in het begin van de 5e eeuw v.Chr. Als beeldhouwer was hij reeds actief in het jaar 475 v.Chr.. Later stond Phidias aan het hoofd van een kunstenaarsatelier waar zijn leerlingen onder zijn supervisie een belangrijk aandeel hadden in de uitvoering van de vele opdrachten die hij kreeg. Als trouwe vriend van Pericles, werd hij van 447 tot 438 v.Chr. belast met het toezicht op de uitvoering van de Parthenon-sculpturen. 

Door politieke vijanden van Pericles werd Phidias in 432 beschuldigd van verduistering van staatsgelden (goud en ivoor, bestemd voor het beeld van Athene). Hij werd gearresteerd en moest zich voor de rechtbank rechtvaardigen. Volgens sommige bronnen overleed Phidias in de gevangenis, maar een andere versie lijkt aannemelijker. Volgens deze zou hij zich na de rechtszaak in ballingschap teruggetrokken hebben in Olympia, waar hij in 417 overleed. Het is in elk geval bewezen dat hij in Olympia een atelier heeft gehad.

==Werk==
De kunst van Phidias toont ons de idealiserende, klassieke stijl, die langzaam maar zeker evolueert naar het grotere realisme dat de Hellenistische kunst zal kenmerken. De typische phidias kenmerken zijn: poëtisch (weinig of geen pathos), een bijna grafische uitbeelding van gewaden, soepele en elegante houdingen, draperie mouillé en waardigheid en sereniteit. Hij was wel de ontwerper van de motieven, doch hij kan onmogelijk alles zelf uitgevoerd hebben: hiervoor kon hij op een hele staf medewerkers rekenen.

Phidias’ '''beroemdste werken''' waren: 
* de meer dan 10m hoge beelden van Zeus Olympios in de tempel van Olympia en van Athena Parthenos in de Parthenon, beide uitgevoerd in chryselephantine (d.i. goud-en-ivoor op houten kern)
* een eveneens reusachtig bronzen beeld van ''Athena Promachos'' (d.i. ''"Vóór-vechtster"''), opgesteld in de open lucht op de Acropolis, waarvan men uit zee de helm kon zien glanzen (als een soort Atheens vrijheidsbeeld). 
* een bronzen beeld van Athena Lemnia, uitgevoerd in opdracht van de kolonisten uit Lemnos en opgesteld op de Atheense Acropolis als herinnering aan de overwinning van Marathon
* het meest sprekend voor zijn eigen stijl was het decoratieve beeldhouwwerk voor de Parthenon: de beeldengroepen van de twee gevelvelden, de 92 fries. 