'''Libbie Henrietta Hyman''' (* US-amerikanische Zoologin.

== Leben und Wirken ==
Hymans Vater war Pole, ihre Mutter war Deutsche. Sie wuchs in ärmlichen Verhältnissen auf. Hyman erhielt ihren Ph. D. 1915 von der University of Chicago in Illinois. Danach forschte sie von 1916 bis 1931 an derselben Universität beim Zoologen Charles Manning Child. Ein Forschungsschwerpunkt während dieser Zeit waren Plattwürmer. Ab 1937 bis zu ihrem Tode 1969 übte sie eine Forschungstätigkeit („honorary research appointment“) am American Museum of Natural History in New York aus.

Von 1959 bis 1963 war Hyman Herausgeber der ''Systematic Zoology''. 1959 war sie Präsidentin der Society of Systematic Zoology. 1960 wurde sie mit der Linné-Medaille der Linnean Society of London ausgezeichnet. Vom American Museum of Natural History erhielt sie einen „Gold Medal Award“.

== Werke ==
Hymans umfassendstes Werk war das sechsbändige ''The Invertebrates'' (1940–1968), von dem bei ihrem Tode einzelne Bände noch unvollendet waren. Ihre Handbücher ''Laboratory Manual for Elementary Zoology'' (1919) und ''A Laboratory Manual for Comparative Vertebrate Anatomy'' (1922) waren vielbenutzte Werke. Hier eine Auswahl ihrer Werke:
* 
* 
* 
* 

'''Libby Henrietta Hyman''' (December 6, 1888 – August 3, 1969), was an American zoologist. 

Born in Des Moines, Iowa, she was the daughter of Joseph Hyman and Sabina Neumann. Hyman's father, a Polish/Russian Jew, adopted the surname when he immigrated to the United States as a youth. He successively owned clothing stores in Des Moines, in Sioux Falls, South Dakota, and in Fort Dodge, Iowa, but the family's resources were limited. Hyman attended public schools in Fort Dodge. At home she was required to do much of the housework. She enjoyed reading, especially books by Charles Dickens in her father's small den, and she took a strong interest in flowers, which she learned to classify with a copy of Asa Gray's ''Elements of Botany''. She also collected butterflies and moths and later wrote, "I believe my interest in nature is primarily aesthetic." 

Hyman graduated from high school in Fort Dodge in 1905 as the youngest member of her class and the valedictorian. Uncertain of her future, she began work in a local factory, pasting labels on cereal boxes. Her high school teacher of English and German persuaded her to attend the University of Chicago, which she entered in 1906 on a one-year scholarship. She continued at the university with further scholarships and nominal jobs. Turning away from botany because of an unpleasant laboratory assistant, she tried chemistry but did not like its quantitative procedures. She then took zoology and was encouraged in it by Professor Charles Manning Child. After receiving a B.S. in zoology in 1910, she acted on Child's advice to continue with graduate work at the University of Chicago. Supporting herself as laboratory assistant in various zoology courses, she concluded that a better laboratory text was needed, which in time she was to supply. She received a Ph.D. in zoology in 1915, with a thesis on regeneration in certain annelid worms. Again unsure of her future, she accepted a position as research assistant in Child's laboratory, and she taught undergraduate courses in comparative anatomy. 

After Hyman's father's death in 1907, her mother had moved to Chicago, bringing Hyman "back into the same unhappy circumstances which lasted until the death of my mother in 1929. I never received any encouragement from my family to continue my academic career; in fact my determination to attend the University met with derision. At home, scolding and fault-finding were my daily portion" (quoted in Hutchinson, p. 106). 

At the request of the University of Chicago Press, Hyman wrote ''A Laboratory Manual for Elementary Zoology'' (1919), which promptly became widely used, to her astonishment. She followed this, again at the publisher's request, with ''A Laboratory Manual for Comparative Vertebrate Anatomy'' (1922), which also had great success. She was, however, much more interested in invertebrates. By 1925 she was considering how to prepare a laboratory guide in that field but "was persuaded by [unnamed] colleagues to write an advanced text" (quoted in Hutchinson, p. 107). 

While at the University of Chicago, Hyman also wrote significant taxonomic papers on such invertebrates as the Hydra. She published an enlarged edition of her first laboratory manual in 1929. 

In 1931 Hyman concluded that she could live on the royalties of her published books, and she also recognized that her mentor Child was about to retire. She therefore resigned her position at Chicago. Hyman toured western Europe for fifteen months and then returned to begin writing a treatise on the invertebrates. Settling in New York City in order to use the library of the American Museum of Natural History, she became, in December 1936, an unpaid research associate of the museum, which provided her with an office for the rest of her life. 