'''Olivia Harrison''' (* Beatles-Mitgliedes George Harrison. Das Ehepaar heiratete am 2. September 1978. Olivia war Harrisons zweite Ehefrau nach Pattie Boyd. Die beiden haben einen Sohn.

Olivia Harrison ist die Tochter eines Trockenmittelherstellers und einer Näherin und hat zwei Geschwister. Die Schule schloss sie 1963 ab. Später arbeitete sie als Sekretärin bei A&M Records, wo ihr späterer Ehemann George Harrison einen Plattenvertrag unterschrieben hatte.

Seit den 1990er Jahren setzt sich Olivia Harrison zusammen mit Yoko Ono, Linda McCartney (mittlerweile verstorben) und Barbara Bach in einer wohltätigen Stiftung namens „Romanian Angel Appeal“ für Kinder ein, die in Rumänien in Armut leben. Anfang der 1990er Jahre erklärte sie hierzu: ''„It was sort of a gradual assault on my conscience. It was slowly wearing away at me and I decided that perhaps we should try to raise some money […] I went to Romania and was just overwhelmed, devastated and shocked by the situation.“''

2005 erhielt sie als Produzentin des Musikfilms ''Grammy in der Kategorie ''Best Long Form Music Video'' (Bestes Musik-Langvideo).

Heute verwaltet Olivia Harrison das musikalische Erbe ihres verstorbenen Mannes.

== Werke ==

'''Olivia Trinidad Arias''' (born May 18 1948 in Los Angeles), aka '''Olivia Harrison''', is the widow of George Harrison, former member of The Beatles. They were married on September 2 1978, following George's divorce from Pattie Boyd, and had one son together, Dhani Harrison, born August 1, 1978.

Olivia is the daughter of dry-cleaner Esiquiel Arias, and his wife Mary Louise, who worked as a seamstress.  She has brothers named Ron and Gilbert and sisters named Chris and Linda.  Olivia attended Hawthorne High School and graduated in 1965. She later worked as a secretary at A&M Records, where George Harrison happened to hold a recording contract. Olivia attended Ringo and Barbara's wedding in 1981 without her wedding ring giving rise to speculation that her marriage to George was a hoax.  This is not true however, as Olivia's parents did serve as witnesses and only attendees at their private wedding ceremony at Henley-on-Thames Register Office in England.  George's brothers at Friar Park were not invited.  George always referred to her by her maiden name Arias on all his original albums and even named her "my wife Arias" in a Musician Magazine article, c.1991.

Olivia, together with Beatles' wives Linda McCartney, Yoko Ono and Barbara Bach, has been involved with the Romanian Angel Appeal since the early 1990s, which has raised millions of dollars to provide aid for children living in devastation. 

Olivia Harrison produced The Best Long Form Music Video category.

Olivia reveals her concerns for the Romanian orphans in this quotation (from her appearance on "Wogan", transmitted 22 June 1990): "''It was sort of a gradual assault on my conscience. It was slowly wearing away at me and I decided that perhaps we should try to raise some money...I went to Romania and was just overwhelmed, devastated and shocked by the situation.''"