'''Famoudou Konaté''' est  un musicien guinéen, né en 1940 près du village de Sangbarala, dans la région de Kouroussa, en Haute-Guinée. 

Son parcours est très proche de celui de Mamady Keïta. Il fut recruté à l'âge de 19 ans dans les Ballets Africains, l'autre grand ballet national de la République de Guinée avec lequel il parcourut le monde pendant vingt-six ans. En 1987, trois ans après la fin du régime marxiste, il est invité en Allemagne par un connaisseur, Johannes Beer, afin de donner des stages et des concerts.

Famoudou Konaté est considéré par ses pairs comme l'un des plus grands batteurs de l'malinké. Il est l'un des rares à connaître de nombreuses polyrythmies traditionnelles, phrasés et soli qui les accompagnent. Famoudou Konaté a su rester en contact permanent avec le terroir et, malgré ses fréquents séjours en Europe, il demeure encore aujourd'hui en Guinée. Réputé excellent pédagogue, ses stages sont très recherchés. 
Doué d'un son extraordinairement contrasté et d'un jeu d'une efficacité qui n'a d'égale que sa sobriété, Famoudou Konaté fait «chanter» son tambour comme s'il s'agissait d'un instrument mélodique.

{{Infobox Person
| name = Famoudou Konaté
| image = Famadou_Konate_teaching.jpg
| caption = Famadou Konaté teaching at a workshop
| birth_date = 1940
| birth_place = Guinea
| death_date =
| death_place = 
}}
'''Famoudou Konaté''' is a Malinké master drummer from Guinea.  Famoudou Konaté is a world-renowned virtuoso of the djembe drum and its orchestra. One of only a handful of initiated Masters of the Malinké drumming tradition, Famoudou is universally respected as one of the world’s premiere djembe Drum Masters. He has dedicated his life to performing and preserving the music of his people, helping to elevate the djembe orchestra from its traditional roots to worldwide popularity.

Famoudou was born in 1940 near Sangbaralla, a village in the Hamana region of Upper Guinea, the Malinké heartland and the birthplace of the Dunun family of rhythms. A percussive prodigy, he was drumming in community festivals at the age of eight and was soon in demand as a djembefola across the region. From 1959 to 1985, Famoudou was the Lead Djembe Soloist for '''Les Ballets Africains de la République de Guinée''', touring the world and performing with astounding virtuosity. During this time, Famoudou himself created many of the musical arrangements now common in West African performance groups worldwide.

In 1986, Konaté began his independent teaching career in Europe, teaching and performing with the Famoudou Konaté Ensemble, formed and managed by the legendary drumming duo from Berlin, "DJembe Tubabu" (Silvia Kronewald and Paul Engel). In the year 2000, Konaté was invited to the United States for the first time as an independent artist by the [http://chidjembe.com/fkusahome.html Chicago Djembe Project]. Today, Konaté teaches and performs annually throughout Europe, Japan, Israel, North America and West Africa, instilling a generation of non-African drummers with an extraordinary level of training. In 1996 he received an honorary professorship in Didactics of African Musical Practice from University of the Arts Berlin. He has produced 7 CDs, including his most recent release, Hamana Mandenkönö.

He is a Master Teacher, working across cultures, languages and skill levels to assist students with an approachable, patient and flexible teaching style. Famoudou’s passion for the music infuses every workshop. In each session, he effectively communicates a wealth of knowledge and drumming experience through his hands, his heart and his warm sense of humor. Everyone benefits from hands-on, personal contact with Famoudou throughout the workshop experience.