'''Thái Sử Từ''' (166-206) là người ở Hoàng Huyện, đất Ðông Lai, họ là Thái Sử tên là Từ, tự là Tử Nghĩa. Mẹ của Thái Sử Từ vì ân nghĩa với Khổng Dung (cháu mấy đời của Khổng Tử) nên sai Từ đi đánh Quản Hợi.

Năm cuối đời Đông Hán, Thái thú Bắc Hải Khổng Dung bị địch vây khốn trong thành, tiểu tướng Thái Sử Từ chuẩn bị đột phá vòng vây đi mời cứu viện. Thái Sử Từ không hung hăng chém giết vượt trùng vây, mà dắt hai tên kỵ binh đeo cung tên và bia mở cổng thành ra ngoài. Binh sĩ trong thành và kẻ địch ngoài thành thấy thế thì đều lấy làm lạ. Song Thái Sử Từ lại dắt ngựa tiến vào chiến hào, cắm bia xong rồi luyện bắn cung. Bắn hết tên thì trở vào thành. Ngày thứ hai lại đi luyện bắn cung như vậy, quân địch vây thành người thì đứng dậy xem, người thì nằm bất động. Ngày thứ ba, thứ tư ông vẫn làm như thế, quân địch vây thành chẳng còn để ý đến nữa. Ngày thứ năm, Thái Sử Từ ăn no bụng, thu xếp hành trang, đi ra cổng thành như mấy hôm trước. Nhân khi địch không đề phòng, ông đột nhiên nhảy lên lựng ngựa, phóng ra khỏi vòng vây quân địch nhanh như một mũi tên, đến khi quân địch phát hiện ra thì ông đã chạy xa rồi. Sau trận đánh này, ông đã được Khổng Dung đem vàng lụa tạ ơn nhưng ông không nhận. 

Ông trở về hướng nam để giúp thứ sử Dương Châu là Lưu Do, người cùng quận với Từ. Suốt thời gian đó, Lưu Do đang chống lại Tôn Sách. Tôn Sách có trong tay Ngọc Tỷ (Ấn Vua), nhưng lại không có binh quyền thì cái quyền lực ảo đó không nghĩa lý gì, chi bằng cầm nó cho Viên Thiệu mượn ba ngàn quân thực về Giang Đông dựng nghiệp. Khi về đến Giang Đông đánh trận đầu với Thái Sử Từ cả ngày, lúc đầu còn dùng kích, giáo về sau quăng cả vũ khí đánh nhau bằng tay đến rách cả áo giáp vẫn không phân được thắng bại. Hôm sau Tôn Sách dùng mưu bắt sống được Thái Sử Từ. Thấy Thái Sử Từ là một tướng văn võ song toàn nên Tôn Sách đã phân giải mọi điều để chiêu dụ Thái sử Từ về dưới trướng mình. 

{{Three Kingdoms infobox
|Name=Taishi Ci
|Image= 
|Caption=
|Title=Military General
|Kingdom=Sun Ce
|Born=166
|Died=206
|Simp=太史慈
|Trad=太史慈
|Pinyin=Tàishǐ Cí
|WG=T'aishih Tz'u
|Zi=Ziyi (子義)
|Other=
}}

'''Taishi Ci''' (Liu Yao, and Sun Ce.

==Life==
===Early life===
Taishi Ci was born in Huangxian of the Shandong Province) where he studied hard, looked after his mother and was known throughout the province for his fealty, bravery, loyalty, and ingenuity.  When Taishi Ci was twenty-one, he served as a low ranking official in the Donglai commandery. In 186, the Administrator of Donglai, Taishi Ci's superior, was at odds with his own superior, the provincial office of Qing province (青州). Both sent letters of complaints to Luoyang, the imperial capital, to directly voice their discontent against each other. However, the Han government by that time was so corrupted and weak that it was no longer capable of conducting a thorough and unbiased investigation on its own.  Instead, the imperial court often made the decision based on whoever sent the news to the imperial court first, as the incompetent court assumed that the first one was usually the good one.  The Administrator of Donglai learned that the provincial office had already sent his envoy to the imperial capital and he was obvious anxious, so the others recommended Taishi Ci to deliver their own letter of complaint to Luoyang, even if their adversary's envoy reached the capital first.

Just before the city gate, Taishi Ci caught up with the provincial envoy. It was impossible to beat the opposite side and the use of force was out of question.  Instead of competing with the envoy to deliver the letter to the imperial court, Taishi Ci confidently walked over to the envoy and asked him if he was an envoy delivering the letter and if he was indeed an envoy, where the letter was.  Mistaken that Taishi Ci was an imperial court official, the envoy gave him the provincial court's letter, and Taishi Ci immediately took out a knife and cut the letter into pieces.  The envoy realized that he was fooled and attempted to call out helps to arrest Taishi Ci, but Taishi Ci took him away to a remote area and calmed him down, suggesting that they both run for their lives since the envoy was also guilty for so foolishly handing over the letter to be destroyed. The envoy questioned that why should he trust Taishi Ci since Taishi Ci successfully destroyed the letter and would be rewarded by his superior, and there was no reason for Taishi Ci to runaway.  Taishi Ci answered that his superior never told him to destroy the letter, and now he committed a serious crime  and must also flee.  The envoy agreed, but once they were some distance away from Luoyang, Taishi Ci dumped the envoy and successfully delivered his own letter to the court. The provincial office tried to send another letter afterwards, but the imperial court refused to acknowledge it since it arrived later than the commandery's letter.

The success made Taishi Ci famous, but he also became the province's enemy. Fearing retribution, Taishi Ci fled to Liaodong.

===Under Gongsun Du===
In Liaodong, Taishi Ci became a good friend of a famous local scholar Bing Yuan (邴原), who introduced him to Gongsun Du, the local governor.  Taishi Ci was liked and respected by the locals. Because of his criminal fugitive status, Gongsun Du was unable to offer him any official positions immediately, but the prospect was bright and he was expected to play an important role sometime later.  However, this was not meant to be when Taishi Ci's stay in Liaodong was further cut short when he got involved in the affair of Liu Zheng (劉政), a friend of Bing Yuan. Gongsun Du disliked Liu Zheng and tried to execute him, but Liu Zheng was barely able to escape, leaving his followers to be arrested. Bing Yuan, for a time, sheltered Liu Zheng, but Gongsun Du announced that anyone hiding or helping Liu Zheng would be executed as well. In turn, Bing Yuan asked Taishi Ci to take Liu Zheng back to China proper, which Taishi Ci agreed. After their successful escape, Bing Yuan convinced Gongsun Du to release all of Liu Zheng's followers.

===Service under Kong Rong===
Taishi Ci came to the attention of Weifang Prefecture). Kong Rong admired Taishi Ci's fidelity, and so regularly provided food and financial assistance to his mother during Taishi Ci's exile. When Kong Rong was besieged by the tens of thousands Yellow Turban rebels headed by Guan Hai, Taishi Ci's mother implored him to lend aid to Kong Rong as soon as he returned from Liaodong in 193. Originally, Taishi Ci planned to raise a small army, but as a brilliant military commander, he soon realized that there was not enough time, so he walked to Duchang (都昌) by himself, and sneaked into the city before the siege was fully completed.  Taishi Ci immediately asked Kong Rong for an army so that he could fight his way out of the castle in an effort to reinforce Kong Rong and fight off his would-be murderers by defeating them first before the siege completed.  However, Kong Rong refused Taishi Ci's suggestion, fearing that his strength was not strong enough and waited for reinforcement. As a result, not only did the reinforcement not arrive, the enemy completed the siege.

As supplies ran low, a messenger was necessary to request any reinforcement they could get.  Taishi Ci pointed out that Liu Bei of Pingyuan (平原) was the only possible source of help, and got Kong Rong's permission to breakout as the messenger.  Kong Rong worried that since the siege was completed, nobody could get out, but Taishi Ci developed a plan in which he would courageously ride out of the castle's gates each day to practice his archery with only two cavalries.  On the first day, one hundred men pursued him and Taishi Ci returned to the safety behind city walls. He repeated this for the next few days and the enemy began to believe he had no intention to breakout, and thus reduced their force watching Taishi Ci.  Taishi Ci continued doing this until the Yellow Turbans lost interest. Then, with a small escort, Taishi Ci dashed out of the castle, successfully breaking through the enemy lines on the fourth day.  When the enemy realized what was happening, it was too late, and the few that were fast enough to follow Taishi Ci were all shot dead by his arrows.  Riding on, Taishi Ci returned with Liu Bei's three thousand crack troops, finally scattering the Yellow Turban forces surrounding Kong Rong's castle.  Unlike what was depicted in the ''Romance of Three Kingdoms'' where Liu Bei's famous general such as Guan Yu were also sent to help, none of Liu Bei's commanders went.  Instead, Taishi Ci himself was the sole commander leading the three thousand strong army that defeated the enemy.

===Service under Liu Yao===
After this accomplishment and the subsequent suppression of the Yellow Turban Rebellion, Taishi Ci returned south to the Jiangdong District and offered his services to Liu Yao, a capable warlord born and raised in the same village as Taishi Ci himself. During his service under Liu Yao, Imperial Seal in his possession to the wealthy and powerful Han noble, Yuan Shu, in exchange for several thousand of his troops. Alongside his father's already impressive army, Sun Ce and his childhood friend Zhou Yu invaded the lands of Wu, which were under the protection and rule of Liu Yao at the time. Sun Ce had gained a tremendous advantage through the capture of a local city which he could now use to rally and support his army. Unfortunately, Liu Yao was not a good military commander. When Sun Ce attacked him, many his advisors suggested to him that he should name Taishi Ci as the commander-in-chief of his force to defend themselves against Sun Ce, but Liu Yao refused, fearing that giving Taishi Ci the command would tarnish his reputation, since Taishi Ci was once a criminal. Taishi Ci was instead tasked to guard the army's baggage. One day, Taishi Ci came across Sun Ce in Shenting (神亭), but the two duelled to a standstill. As Sun Ce's officers rode to his assistance, Taishi Ci was forced into a hasty retreat. Sun Ce had been impressed with Taishi Ci abilities and held him in good stead, noting him as one of very few men of honour in a chaotic and treacherous period.

Taishi Ci later was forced to break allegiance with Liu Yao after the they fled separate ways, with Liu Yao fled to Yuzhang (豫章) and Taishi Ci to Wuhu, resulting from Liu Yao's refusal to heed Taishi Ci's strategic advice and was subsequently overrun.  Taishi Ci established a guerrilla base in the mountains and earned support of many locals, and from 195 to 198, Taishi Ci waged war against Sun Ce and eventually expanded to include the region of Dangyang, a position of strategic military importance since the time of Sun Tzu, where he proclaimed himself Administrator, with supporters ranging from the ordinary civilians to high ranking local officials. Taishi Ci had become too much of a threat after defeating Yan Baihu, Sun Ce targeted Taishi Ci instead of Liu Yao.  Taishi Ci's remnant forces were quickly besieged by Sun Ce's army at Jin (泾) County and were consequently overrun and captured.

Taishi Ci was tied up and brought before Sun Ce, where Sun Ce, recalling their encounter at Shenting, immediately unbound him. Sun Ce persuaded Taishi Ci to join him, saying that his talents were unrecognized by his previous masters; Sun Ce even said that Taishi Ci was a dragon among people and to fly to the sky the dragon must have a good base, and Sun Ce himself was very honored to be that base. Although initially hesitant, Taishi Ci eventually succumbed to Sun Ce's requests, accepting highly ranked positions within Sun Ce's army. He asked Sun Ce to let him go for a day to collect his remnant troops to pacify the area, and Sun Ce agreed. Answering the suspicion from his advisors, Sun Ce retorted, "Taishi Ziyi is a famed man of Qing province, bound by honour, he will not lie to me", and indeed, Taishi Ci came back the next day. He was appointed as Commander Under the Gate (門下督) and General of the Household (中郎將).

===Service under the Sun family===
thumb|220px|left|Taishi Ci dueling with [[Sun Ce in the 84-episode TV serial ''Romance of the Three Kingdoms''.]]

Taishi Ci remained a loyal and staunch supporter of the Sun family for the rest of his life, feeling an obligation towards Sun Ce for placing such confidence in his abilities. Taishi Ci came to be well reputed amongst his troops and fellow officers and was held in high regard by Sun Quan, younger brother of Sun Ce. During his service under Sun Ce, Sun Ce gave him three important tasks which he completed successfully.

The first was to visit the remnant of forces of the recently deceased Liu Yao, informing them that they were all welcome to Sun Ce's side and if they chose not to, they were free to go.  Everyone of Liu Yao's remnant force surrendered to Sun Ce and Liu Yao's son even excelled under Sun Quan later on.  Unlike what was depicted in the novel ''Romance of Three Kingdoms'' where it only took a day for Taishi Ci to return at the exact time, Taishi Ci actually told Sun Ce that it would take at most 60 days when he left, and he did return within the 60 day limit despite suspicions that he would defect. 