{{Infobox animanga/Header
| name            = The Gentlemen Alliance †
| image           = 
| caption         = Shinshi Dōmei Cross Volume 1
| ja_name         = 紳士同盟†
| ja_name_trans   = Shinshi Dōmei Cross
| genre           = Romance
}}
{{Infobox animanga/Manga
| title           = 
| author          = Arina Tanemura
| publisher       =  Shueisha
| publisher_other = Viz Media <br>  Viz Media <br>  Tokyopop
| demographic     = Shōjo
| magazine        =  Ribon
| first           = September 2004
| last            = June 2008
| volumes         = 10
}}

, known in Japan as ''Shinshi Doumei Cross'', is a shōjo manga by Arina Tanemura, and was published in Ribon. The name was taken from a Japanese song of the same title.

The atmosphere of the series is very different from Tanemura's previous manga series, as it is a volumes currently out in volumes total.

The manga is licenced in North America by Viz Media.

== Synopsis ==
Haine Otomiya, a 15-year-old gang member, Haine reformed when she met Shizumasa Tōgū, who told her to live life how she wanted to. She fell in love with Shizumasa and entered the Imperial Academy to try and win his love.

Now, Shizumasa is the Koutei (皇帝, ''Kōtei'', lit. ''emperor'') of the school. Being the president of the student council and the only member of the gold class, he is the one who everyone looks up to. Through various circumstances Haine is tricked by Maora, a student council member, into becoming his bodyguard and joining the student council. However, Shizumasa claims not to know her and is unexpectedly cold towards her.

== Characters ==
=== Student Council ===

; 
*Rank: Platinum (previously a Bronze)
: The main character of the story, Haine is the fifteen year-old bodyguard of the student council president. She is known for not being very bright, but she has a good heart. 
:Haine was born to the Kamiya family but was adopted into the Otomiya family when she was 10 for 50 million yen. At that time Haine believed it was because her father Kazuhito despised her for not being a good enough heir. It is later on revealed in Chapter 34 that her real father was Itsuki all along and that instead of selling her, all Kazuhito intended to do was to "return her to her real father." 
:Haine had a happy life with Itsuki until he married Ryouka and realized that now Kusame would become the heir to the Otomiya company.  A ninth grader at that time, Haine turned into a , juvenile delinquent. It was at that time that she met Ushio and bonded with her because of their similar situations.  But, after meeting with Shizumasa, Haine changed her ways. When she told the leader of her yankī group (Kasuga) that she was going to leave, Kasuga went into a rage and broke Haine's front two teeth, causing Haine to now wear false teeth. Once those false teeth comes off, it is said that Haine becomes a 'beast'.
:Once she discovered that Takanari is posing as Shizumasa, she wrestles with her feelings for the both of them, eventualluy choosing Takanari after she found out that he was the one who wrote her favorite book. She stated that when the time comes, she will choose one of them.  In the final chapter, Haine decides to marry both Takanari and Shizumasa, since Takanari does not have a family register and would be unable to marry her otherwise.  However, Shizumasa chooses to go abroad to study, leaving Haine only a letter to thank her and hoping that she will live a carefree life.  Several years later, she marries Takanari and Shizumasa returns to see her; as the brothers fight over Haine, she runs away like Cinderella when everyone asks who she will choose.

; 
*Rank: Gold 
:The real Emperor, he is revered by almost everyone at Imperial Academy, helped by the fact that his family is very rich and famous. Shizumasa developed a love for Haine.He acts very cruel to Takanari because he wanted Takanari to hate him after what he did to Takanari in the trial test, but he's a real gentleman to Haine, because of his love for her. Due to his illness, which can be activated by running, however, his twin brother, Takanari, is currently posing as him. 
:A slight difference between Takanari and Shizumasa is that Shizumasa's hair is parted on his right. Tanemura made it easier for the readers to tell the differences between them by shading Takanari's hair and not Shizumasa's. Because of his illness he is MIA for a large portion of the series but returns at the end of Chapter 36. In Chapter 44, it is revealed that he has leukemia and needs Takanari's bone marrow to live but ordered Senri to never speak of it. This reveals that he was planning to die all along. 

:In chapter 47, Shizumasa decides to leave Haine and Takanari, to go study abroad, after he has cured from his illness.  His decision comes from his desire to become a better heir to the Togu family and to no longer rely on others, like Haine and Takanari.  He returns to the people he cares about most, saying he could not forget about Haine, and he intends to become a "married woman's killer", exclusively focusing on Haine.

; 
*Rank: Gold
:Takanari is the Emperor of the student council and Shizumasa's older twin brother. Because of Shizumasa's health problems, Takanari is posing as Shizumasa Koutei, though no one knows this except for the Tougu family and Touya (and, later, Haine and in chapter 42 rest of the student council). 
:In the beginning of the story, he is cold and distant but, once influenced by Haine, he becomes more kind and soft. He hated Haine at first and thought she was annoying. Takanari also accused Haine of having a false love for him, saying that she loves him simply because of his uncanny resemblance to Kazuhito. Later he genuinely falls in love with her and wants her to become his. Even though Haine chose him over his brother in chapter 41 (after learning that Takanari is the real author of the picture book she loved as a child), in chapter 42 Haine is told by Shizumasa that he officially "died" when he was seven, after failing the test given to all twins of the Tougu family. Because of this he technically no longer exists and therefore is unable to marry Haine, shattering her dreams of becoming his bride. Also Shizumasa is still angry with Haine for chosing Takanari over him so he kidnaps him. At the end of Chapter 44, he asks Senri to take him to the hospital so he can give Shizumasa the bone marrow he needs to save his life. Though this is only after he refuses Haine's aid because he doesn't want to take away Shizumasa's last wanted happiness.  In order to allow both brothers to decide for themselves what lives they wish to live, Haine confronts their grandfather, who agrees to abolish the kagemusha system if Haine manages to clear the trial that originally determined that Takanari would become kagemusha to Shizumasa.
:A slight difference between Takanari and Shizumasa is that Takanari parts his hair on his left.

:In chapter 47, Takanari is restored to his family's register; the revelation to the general public that he is actually still alive surprises many.  Furthermore, he will become heir to the Kamiya family when he marries Haine.  He eventually marries her, but he is still wary because of Shizumasa's early return, and the fact that all three of them will be living together in the Togu's house.  In the last words of the story, Takanari states that he was glad that he fell in love with Haine.

; 
*Rank: Silver
:The secretary of the student council and Haine's best friend, who is very protective of her. She constantly tells Haine that Haine is all she needs in life to be happy and regards Haine as being more than just a friend, although Haine herself doesn't realize it at first. In volume 8 however, Haine discovers Ushio's feelings but tells Ushio that she is lying to herself. Angered, Ushio threatens Haine that if she is not willing to be hers, she would not regard Haine as even a friend anymore. Haine obeys her and breaks up with Takanari to devote herself to Ushio, and as she expected, Ushio realizes that in the end she was wrong. She realizes that all along the only reason why she was so attached to Haine was because she didn't think anyone else would accept and forgive her. When Senri-sensei does so, however, she apologizes to Haine for being so selfish. Later in Chapter 34, she confesses that she loves Senri.
:She is known as "Lady Hydrangea" (紫陽花の君) by the boys at school. Unfortunately, she absolutely despises boys, but uses them both for her own gain and, more so, to get Haine's attention. She dislikes social climbers, especially students in the higher ranks. She joined the Student Council to be with Haine, by donating money to the school. She is also very knowledgeable of Japanese quotes and proverbs. 
:Her father is in the real estate business and her mother is an ikebana master; Ushio had been adopted by her parents because they were unable to conceive an heir.  However, they do not love her so she does not speak with her father for the most part and lives in her own apartment.  It is because of their similar circumstances that Ushio and Haine first became friends.

:In chapter 47, Senri finally confesses his feelings for Ushio, and they become a couple. <br style="clear:both;">

; 
*Rank: Silver
:The treasurer and brains of the Student Council. Maora is  a male, his real name being Yoshitaka Ichinomiya, and is childhood friends with Maguri. His parents are fashion designers and Maora usually dresses as a girl. He has a pet, a "mini-sheep" named Okori-makuri, who is the mascot of the series. 

:Maora is secretly the Mailman of the Imperial Academy.  As the Mailman, he bonds with Haine and falls in love with her. When his identity was revealed, he tells Haine he loves her and challenges "Shizumasa" (Takanari) for the Koutei title, just so he can make Haine his love.  Haine becomes upset, not only because Maora is trying to take her away from Takanari, but also because Maora is only trying to use Haine as a substitute for Maguri, since they are both cheerful and can be rather stupid.  Maora believed that he was too "weak" for Maguri, but after a confrontation from Haine, Maora realizes his love for Maguri and confesses to him.<br style="clear:both;">

; 
*Rank: Silver
:The vice president of the Student Council. Maguri is Takanari's best friend, even giving him the nickname of Shi-zun (initially he didn't know that Takanari wasn't Shizumasa). His family are yakuza members, but even then he has a soft side. His brother is Yūkimitsu, who was the former Emperor before Shizumasa.  He is also the only one of the student counsel members to not kiss Haine.
:At the beginning of the series, he is the secret "lover" of Takanari, but Haine discovers it is just a rumor intentionally spread so that girls would stay away from Takanari. When Haine becomes Takanari's girlfriend, however, Haine realizes that Maguri's feelings for Takanari are real. Maguri graciously gives up and pursues the Mailman, only to find out that he is really Maora. Maora gets angry at him for being so weak, since when they were younger, they were laughed at by their parents for saying they wanted to marry one another. Maguri realizes that he too loves Maora and promises that he will become stronger for Maora's sake.
:Arina Tanemura imagines J-Drama actor, Mokomichi Hayami as an ideal, cool, and tall Maguri. Their hair texture is about the same. <br style="clear:both;">

=== Otomiyas === 

; 
*Rank: Formerly Gold
:The former Emperor of the student council and secret boyfriend of the Bronze, Maika. Later, Haine finds out that he is and always has been her real father, and that Kazuhito Kamiya was not. Haine is the result of Maika and Itsuki, but was born after Maika and Kazuhito were married.  Though it is given that because Itsuki was incapable of having children and as a result,  Kazuhito offered to adopt away Haine to become the Otomiya heir, Kazuhito discloses to Maika that the his actual reason behind adoption was that he was returning Haine to her "real" father.  Itsuki remains unaware that Haine is his biological daughter.  After he adopting Haine, he later falls in love with and marries Ryouka and adopts Ryouka's son Kusame.<br style="clear:both;">

; 
*Rank: Bronze
:Ryouka is Itsuki's wife, and claims she fell in love with him at first sight (when actually, she liked him when they were still in school). Before her marriage to Itsuki, Ryouka had already been married and had a son, Kusame, though her first husband is now deceased.  She is a cheerful woman who likes to tease both her son and Haine, whom she cares for like her own daughter.  During high school, Ryouka had observed Maika and Itsuki and knew that they were "close friends".  She also said that she loved Maika when Haine asked her if a girl ever liked her.<br style="clear:both;">

; 
*Rank: Silver
Birthday; May 1
Blood Type : AB
:Haine's stepbrother and Itsuki's stepson, Kusame is the heir to the Otomiya family.  Secretly, he fell in love with Haine at first sight and refuses to call her ''onee-chan'' ("big sister") for that reason.  Kusame is a silver, honor student and vice president of Imperial Academy Junior section's Student Council. He became vice president by earning points, not with money. He works in the Junior Student Council with Komaki and is forced to become her boyfriend because of a public confession. However, in a special not seen in the regular chapters of the manga, Kusame realizes that he likes Komaki and they become a real couple.  After accepting Komaki's feelings for him, Kusame ends up competing with Tachibana for Haine's affection as their older sister.<br style="clear:both;">

=== Kamiyas ===

; 
*Rank: Gold (although he was Silver before)
:Kazuhito is married to Maika, Haine's mother. Kazuhito was originally the Vice Chairman of the Student Council when he was at the Imperial Academy while Itsuki was the Emperor.  When Kazuhito first saw Maika, she was practicing ballet under a cherry blossom tree when she kicked out her leg and accidentally landed on him.  He fell in love with her and believed that she loved him as well, but after seeing her together with Itsuki, he lost control and stole Itsuki's position through having a new election. He won the election by the students' "lack of confidence" in Itsuki and became the new Emperor. Immediately, he formed the rank of "Platinum" and granted the title to Maika, who became the first Platinum ever, announcing her as his girlfriend and almost forcefully binding her to him. Although he seems cold, he genuinely loves Maika and it is very evident in the later chapters that he cares deeply for her.

:He was believed to be Haine's father until it was revealed in the end of Chapter 35 that Itsuki is Haine's biological father.  As a result, it is believed that Kazuhito does not care for Haine and has known for some time that she was not his biological daughter; his reasoning for "selling" Haine to Itsuki Otomiya had not only been for the money he needed, but also to return her to her "real father".  In Chapter 37, however, it was revealed through a letter Kazuhito wrote to the Principal of the Imperial Academy that he does very much care about Haine and her well being, despite how coldly he acts toward her. It is also revealed that he gave her to Itsuki because she reminded him too much of Maika and he did not want Haine to be unhappy like Maika; therefore he thought selling her to Itsuki would make her free of the rules in the Kamiya family.<br style="clear:both;">

; 
*Rank: Platinum (was a Bronze before)
:Maika is married to Kazuhito and mother to Haine, Komaki, and Tachibana.  Originally Maika Rikyuu (離宮 舞加, ''Rikyū Maika''), a Bronze and the secret girlfriend of Itsuki Otomiya, she became friends with Kazuhito, who fell in love with her.  After Kazuhito won the Emperor election, she was forced to become his girlfriend. Her family pushed her to marry Kazuhito as her father was ill and their company would suffer without the money they would receive from her marriage. Itsuki encouraged her to marry Kazuhito because it would benefit her family, though he went through pain in order to do so. She pledges that though Kazuhito may have her through marriage, he would never have her heart.  However, she finds herself unable to leave Kazuhito after learning how lonely he has always been and that she is an extremely important person to him.

'''Shinshi Doumei Cross''' (jap. 紳士同盟† ''shinshi dōmei kurosu''; übersetzt ''Allianz der Gentlemen'' ist gleichzeitig der deutsche Untertitel) ist ein Manga von Arina Tanemura. Er ist unter der Hauptkategorie Shōjo den Genres Romance (Romanze) und Comedy (Komödie) zuzuordnen.

== Veröffentlichung ==
Der Manga erscheint seit 2004 in Einzelkapiteln im japanischen Manga-Magazin Ribon, das sich an junge Mädchen richtet. Die einzelnen Kapitel werden auch in Sammelbänden herausgegeben, in Japan von Shueisha, in Deutschland von TOKYOPOP. Von diesen sind bisher alle 10 Bände in Japan und in Deutschland 8 Bände erschienen.

== Handlung ==
''Haine Otomiya'' ist in ''Shizumasa Togu'' verliebt. Als sie erfährt, dass Shizumasa auf die „Kaiserliche Privatakademie“ geht, strebt sie auch eine Aufnahme an dieser bekannten Akademie an. Dies schafft sie auch, doch als Ex-Yankee hat sie es nicht leicht, sich auf einer Schule zurechtzufinden, in die normalerweise nur Jugendliche der Oberschicht aufgenommen werden. Zu allem Überfluss ist ihr Schwarm Shizumasa auch noch in der Gold-Klasse und Präsident des Schülerrates der Oberstufe, weshalb er von allen ehrfurchtsvoll als „Kaiser“ angeredet wird. Trotzdem versucht sie alles nur Erdenkliche, um ihrem Liebsten näher zu kommen und langsam zeichnen sich erste Fortschritte ab.

Nach und nach klärt sich, warum sich Haine in Shizumasa verliebt hat. Doch je näher sie dem Kaiser steht, desto mehr wird sie in die Intrigen und Pläne der Reichen hineingezogen. Auch muss sie erfahren dass der Kaiser nicht der ist, der er vorgibt zu sein. Haine erkennt, dass sie auch den Zwillingsbruder von Shizumasa, Takanari Togu, liebt.

== Charaktere ==
'''Haine Otomiya''' 

- Rang: Platin (eigentlich Bronze)
:Das 15-jährige Mädchen Haine Otomiya war früher ein Kind der Familie Kamiya. Aus Gründen, die sich erst im Laufe der Geschichte heraus kristallisieren, wurde die damals 10-jährige Haine zur Adoption freigegeben und an die Familie Otomiya „verkauft“. Dies war ein sehr großer Schock für Haine, ihre Reaktion darauf war, sich als Yankee jede Nacht aus unerfindlichen Gründen mit jemandem zu prügeln. Shizumasa gabelte die verzweifelte Haine an einer Straßenecke auf und verschaffte ihr neuen Mut, um wieder ein geregeltes Leben zu führen. Dieses Ereignis ermunterte Haine dazu, auch auf die Kaiserliche Akademie zu gehen. Haine wurde schließlich zu einem lebensfrohen Mädchen, das immer direkt sagt, was sie denkt. Sie ist sehr fleißig und bereit, für ihre Ziele zu kämpfen. Ihre Aufgabe im Schülerrat ist es, als Leibwächterin den Kaiser zu beschützen. Außerdem hat Shizumasa sie zu seiner "Alibigeliebten" gemacht und sie somit in die Platinklasse erhoben. Als sie erfährt dass ihre Freundin Ushio mehrere Liebschaften mit Schülern der Akademie hat, stellt Ushio ihr ein Ultimatum. Entweder sie oder die anderen. Sie entscheidet sich für Ushio um diese zu "retten". Später erfährt Haine, dass "Shizumasa" in Wirklichkeit Takanari Togu ist, der Zwillingsbruder von dem "echten" Shizumasa.Anfangs hat sie Gefühle für beide Brüder, doch als sie herausfindet, dass Takanari der wahre Autor des Kinderbuches "Das unvergessene Lied der Hexe" ist,entscheidet sie sich für Takanari. Als Haine ihm ihre Liebe gesteht, steht nicht Takanari mit dem Rücken zu ihr, sondern Shizumasa, der daraufhin Takanari, der aus der Tür hinter Haine angerannt kommt um Haine vor Shizumasa zu beschützen, entführen lässt.Am nächsten Tag verkündet Shizumasa die Verlobung von ihm und Haine.Haine sucht verzweifelt nach Takanari und bekommt einen entscheidenden Hinweis von Takanaris Mutter,die um ihre Hilfe bittet ihn zu befreien.Am Verlies weigert sich Takanari zu fliehen, da er das letzte Glück seines Bruders nicht wegnehmen will(also Haine).

'''Shizumasa Togu'''

- Rang: Gold
:Shizumasa Togu ist der Vorsitzende des Schülerrats der Kaiserlichen Privatakademie und außerdem der Erbe des erfolgreichen Togu-Konzerns. Als Kind hat Haine ihm ihre Liebe gestanden und einige Jahre später versprach er ihr, sich auch in sie zu verlieben. Doch auf Grund einer schweren Krankheit ist es ihm nicht möglich die Schule zu besuchen. Somit kann er weder seinen familiären und schulischen Pflichten nachkommen noch Haine treffen, in die er mittlerweile tatsächlich verliebt ist. Offiziell hat Shizumasa-sama das Kinderbuch: "Das unvergessene Lied der Hexe" geschrieben.Später weiß man, dass er unter Leukämie leidet und schon von Anfang an geplant hat zu sterben.

'''Takanari Togu'''

- Rang : Gold
:Der ältere Zwillingsbruder von Shizumasa ist sehr verschlossen und unnahbar. Er vertritt Shizumasa als Kaiser an der Akademie und lernt dort Haine kennen, die er zu seiner Platina macht, um ihr weh zu tun und damit seinem Bruder etwas zurückzuzahlen. Doch, als Haine ihm ihre Liebe und den Grund für eben diese Liebe, nämlich sein Kinderbuch (das tatsächlich Takanari geschrieben hat), gesteht, beginnt er sich ebenfalls in sie zu verlieben und beschließt um sie zu kämpfen. Einige Zeit später klärt Senri Takanari (Nach der Entführung, im "Verlies") auf, dass sein Bruder unter Leukämie leidet und Takanaris Knochenmark braucht um weiterleben zu können, weshalb er Haines Hilfe zu flüchten ablehnt, da er Shizumasas letztes Glück nicht wegnehmen will und Senri darum bittet, ins Krankenhaus zu fahren, um sein Knochenmark an Shizumasa zu spenden.