thumb|right|250px|Roger Schutz en una celebració de la [[Comunitat de Taizé l'any 2003]]
'''Roger Louis Schütz-Marsauche''', més conegut com a '''Germà Roger''' o '''Frère Roger''', ( Provence, Suïssa 1915 - Taizé, França 2005 ) fou un teòleg suís fundador i prior de la Comunitat de Taizé.

==Biografia== 
Va néixer el Provence, població situada al cantó de religió protestant. Entre protestant a la Estrasburg. 

El germà Roger va morir el 16 d'agost de 2005 després de ser apunyalat per Luminiţa Ruxandra Solcan, una dona romanesa pel que sembla malalta mental, durant l'oració vespertina a l'església de la Reconciliació de Taizé. El 23 d'agost d'aquell any se celebraren els funerals, on hi foren presents el president d'Alemanya Horst Köhler i el Ministre d'Interior de França Nicolas Sarkozy. 

El successor del germà Roger com a prior de la Comunitat de Taizé fou Alois Löser, conegut com a germà Löser, escollit pel fundador 8 anys abans de la seva mort.

==Establiment a Taizé==
thumb|El germà Roger
El exèrcit alemany, es va establir a la població de presoners de guerra, el que li va cobrar el recel dels veïns. 

El ecumènica avui en dia està integrada per més de cent germans protestants i catòlics provinents de vint-i-cinc països, que viuen només del seu treball (terrisseria, edició de llibres religiosos) i no accepten donacions. La profunda espiritualitat i la vida conseqüent de Roger Schütz i els demés germans de la congregació sempre ha atret a Taizé molts joves de nombrosos països. 

Una de les majors preocupacions del germà Roger fou la reconciliació dels cristianisme. Des de l'agost de 1971 existeix un representant permanent de la comunitat a Roma i amb motiu de la seva visita al patriarca Atenàgores de l'Església Ortodoxa, aquest va manifestar que volia confessar-se amb el prior de Taizé. 

thumb|right|250px|Brother Roger of Taizé, 2003'''Frère Roger''' (Brother Roger) (Taizé, ecumenical monastic community.

== Background ==
Roger was born the ninth and youngest child of Karl Ulrich Schütz, a Protestant pastor from Bachs in the Zürcher Unterland (Zürich Lowlands) in Switzerland, and his wife, Amélie Henriette Schütz-Marsauche, a French Protestant woman from Burgundy.

From 1937 to 1940, Roger studied Reformed theology in Strasbourg and Lausanne.

In 1940, he rode a bicycle from unoccupied France, just beyond the line of demarcation to the zone occupied by German troops. For two years Brother Roger hid Jewish refugees before being forced to leave Taizé. In 1944, he returned to Taizé to found the Community, first as a small quasi-monastic community of men living together in poverty and obedience. 

Since the late 1950s, many thousands of young adults from many countries have found their way to Taizé to take part in weekly meetings of prayer and reflection. In addition, Taizé brothers make visits and lead meetings, large and small, in Africa, North and South America, Asia, and in Europe, as part of a “pilgrimage of trust on earth”.

The spiritual leader always kept a low profile, rarely giving interviews and refusing to permit any "cult" to grow up around himself. Prior to his death, he was due to give up his community functions because of his advanced age and ill-health which had seen him suffer from fatigue and often use a wheelchair.

Brother Roger was awarded the UNESCO prize for peace education in 1988 and wrote many books on prayer and reflection, asking young people to be confident in God and committed to their local church community and to humanity. He also wrote books about Christian spirituality and prayer, some together with Mother Teresa with whom he shared a cordial friendship.

== Ecumenical ideals == 
thumb|Brother Roger, 1991.All his life, Roger devoted himself to reconciling the different Taizé gathering in Paris in 1995, he spoke to more than 100,000 young people who were sitting on the floor of an exhibition hall. "We have come here to search," he said, "or to go on searching through silence and prayer, to get in touch with our inner life. Christ always said, Do not worry, give yourself." [http://www.nytimes.com/2005/08/18/international/europe/18roger.html]

From a Protestant background, Brother Roger undertook a step that was without precedent since the Reformation: entering progressively into a full communion with the faith of the Catholic Church without a “conversion” that would imply a break with his origins. In 1980, during a European Meeting in Rome, he said in St Peter’s Basilica in the presence of Pope John Paul II: “I have found my own identity as a Christian by reconciling within myself the faith of my origins with the mystery of the Catholic faith, without breaking fellowship with anyone.”

== Death ==

Brother Roger was stabbed to death during the evening prayer service in Taizé on August 16, 2005 by Luminiţa Ruxandra Solcan. He was stabbed several times and, though one of the brothers carried him from the church, he died shortly afterwards. The assailant was immediately apprehended by members of the congregation and was placed in police custody.  

His stabbing lead many who already considered him a saint to think of him as a martyr, even though there is no clear link between his faith and the crime.