'''Francis "Frank" J. Selke''' (* Berlin, kanadischer Eishockeymanager und -trainer.

== Karriere ==
Bereits im Alter von 14 Jahren übernahm Frank J. Selke das Management des Eishockeyteams Iroquois Bantams und mit 26 Jahren führte er die University of Toronto als Trainer zum Sieg beim erstmals ausgetragenen Memorial Cup.

Ins große Geschäft stieg er schließlich ein, als NHL holte und half Smythe besonders stark bei der Realisierung des Maple Leaf Gardens.

1942 übernahm Selke die Geschäfte der Maple Leafs, als Smythe für Kanada in den Zweiten Weltkrieg zog. In Abwesenheit von Smythe transferierte Selke Frank Eddolls zu den Montréal Canadiens und erhielt dafür Ted Kennedy. Smythe erfuhr von diesem Transfergeschäft und war damit alles andere als einverstanden, da er Sympathien für Eddolls hegte. In den folgenden Jahren entwickelte sich aber Kennedy zu einem der besten Spieler der Maple Leafs, während Eddolls keine große Karriere starten konnte, weshalb Selke bei dieser Entscheidung richtig lag. Ein weiterer Punkt, der die beiden Freunde noch weiter auseinander trieb, war die Freigabe des Maple Leaf Gardens durch Selke für Veranstaltungen, die nichts mit Eishockey zu tun hatten. Als Smythe 1945 aus Europa zurückkehrte, sah er sich einer großen Gruppe von Offiziellen der Maple Leafs gegenüber, die dafür plädierten, dass Frank J. Selke weiterhin als General Manager operieren sollte. Smythe kämpfte dagegen an und erhielt schlussendlich wieder die Kontrolle über das Team, doch seine Freundschaft mit Selke war zerstört. Selke verließ das Team 1946, nachdem es unter der Leitung Smythe-Selke drei Mal den Stanley Cup gewinnen konnte.

Kurz darauf übernahm er den Posten als General Manager bei den Montréal Canadiens, die der Erzfeind der Maple Leafs sind. In den fünfziger Jahren blüte das Farmsystem auf, das er in Montréal aufgebaut hatte und viele große Talente gingen aus diesem hervor, wie Jean Beliveau, Dickie Moore oder Henri Richard.

'''Francis Joseph Aloysius Selke''' (Canadian hockey manager in the National Hockey League.

==Early career==
Born in Berlin, Ontario (now Kitchener), Selke was managing the Iroquois Bantams  in his hometown at the age of 14. He coached the Berlin Union Jacks junior team in the Ontario Hockey Association from 1912–1915, reaching the finals of the league championship in his final season. In 1919, he coached the University of Toronto Schools hockey team to the first Memorial Cup title. He coached the St. Mary's junior OHA team to its third-straight SPA junior championship in the 1924–25 season, with a team that included future Leafs star Joe Primeau. Selke again coached St. Mary's in 1925–26. For the 1926–27 season, the team became the Toronto Marlboros, and again won the junior SPA championship. Red Horner was a star defenceman on the Toronto team. Selke also coached the Marlboros senior team. In 1927–28, Selke was coach and manager of the Toronto Ravinas of the Canadian Professional Hockey League, with Primeau as the team's leading scorer. The team was bought by the Toronto Maple Leafs and renamed the Toronto Falcons mid-season. Late in the year, the team played some home games in Brantford, Ontario after drawing poor crowds all season in Toronto. Rejoining the Marlboros for 1928–29, Selke helped lead the team to the Memorial Cup championship in 1929.

==Hired by the Leafs==
Selke became the top assistant to Leafs managing director Ted Kennedy in 1943. Kennedy would go on to become one of Smythe's favourite Leafs, but at the time he was a big supporter of Eddolls and was upset that he hadn't been consulted before Selke made the deal. Once Smythe returned to Toronto, there was tension between the two, particularly after Selke wouldn't back Smythe's bid to become president of Maple Leaf Gardens Ltd. With his working conditions becoming intolerable, Selke turned in his resignation in May 1946. 

==Joins the Canadiens==
Two months after resigning from the Leafs, Selke was hired as manager of the Montreal Forum and became general manager of the Montreal Canadiens. He took over a team that was in financial trouble, even though they were winners. But with his money he grabbed as many players as he could, creating an extensive farm system. He had great success with the Canadiens. His club, anchored by Maurice Richard, Elmer Lach, Doug Harvey and Jacques Plante won the Stanley Cup in 1953. 

By the mid-1950s, the farm system that Selke had established really began to put life into the Canadiens as Jean Beliveau, Dickie Moore, Tom Johnson and Henri Richard came into the star-studded Canadiens and in consecutive years, 1954 and 1955, the Habs pushed the great Detroit Red Wings to the seven game limit before losing the finals. In 1956, they won the first of five consecutive Cups, a record that has never been beaten. Selke retired after the 1964 season, turning the reins over to Sam Pollock. He died in 1985 at the age of 92 in Rigaud, Quebec.