'''Lew Grade, Baron Grade''' (eigentlich: ''Louis Winogradsky''; * Tokmak, England) war ein britischer ukrainischer Herkunft.

== Biografie ==
Louis Winogradsky wurde als ältester von drei Söhnen des jüdischen Ehepaares Olga und Isaac Winogradsky in der Ukraine, dem ehemaligen Russischen Reich, geboren. Während sein Bruder Bernard 1909 († 1994) in der Ukraine geboren wurde, kam sein jüngster Bruder Leslie in England zur Welt. Dahin emigrierte die Familie 1912, wo Isaac im East End von London die Leitung eines Kinos übernahm. Die Familie bekam die Britische Staatsbürgerschaft.

Mit 15 Jahren begann er als Angestellter in einer Charleston-Wettbewerb in der Royal Albert Hall teil und gewann den Wettbewerb. Nun nahm er sein Pseudonym ''Lew Grade'' an, und begann seinen Weg im Showbusiness als professioneller Tänzer.

Grade, sein Bruder Leslie (* 1916; † 1979) und ihr Partner Joe Collins (Vater der Schauspielerin Joan Collins) gründeten 1933 eine Agentur, die zur größten von England werden sollte. Stars wie Ralph Richardson und Laurence Olivier wurden durch sie gefördert. Grades zweiter Bruder, Bernard, machte auch seinen Weg und wurde Chef der EMI Group.

Lew Grade gründete seine eigene fusionierte. Nun Filmproduzent, verhalf er Jim Henson und dessen ''Muppet Show'' in England zu größerer Bekanntheit. Ein Welthit gelang Grade 1970/71 mit der Fernsehserie ''The Persuaders!'' (Die Zwei); es wurde als besonderer Coup gewertet, dass Grade es schaffte, den amerikanischen Superstar Tony Curtis für die Hauptrolle in dieser Produktion zu gewinnen - das erste und bis heute einzige Mal, dass ein Filmstar dieser Größenordnung eine Rolle in einer englischen Fernsehproduktion übernahm.

Grade war die treibende Kraft hinter dem Privatsender ATV, die er in direkter Konkurrenz zur Jesus von Nazareth'', der Film, den Grade am bekanntesten machte, da er auch am US-Markt Erfolge verbuchen konnte. Auf der anderen Seite entpuppte sich der 1980 produzierte Spielfilm ''Hebt die Titanic'' nach einer Romanvorlage des US-amerikanischen Schriftstellers Clive Cussler als Grades größter Flop.

Bereits 1969 war Grade zum Life Peer als ''Baron Grade of Elstree'' im County of Hertfordshire ernannt worden.

'''Lew Grade, Baron Grade''' (ATV.
==Biography==
===Early years===
He was born in Tokmak, Charleston competition at the Royal Albert Hall in 1926, he became a professional dancer under the name Lew Grade. In 1933, he founded a talent agency with his brother, Bernard.

At his 50th wedding anniversary party after being toasted by all in the room, he rose to address the gathering with a story.  Early in the days of the talent agency, he and his brother shared an office on Wardour Street in London.  The office was small with one telephone.  As the brothers did not have enough money for a secretary, it was impossible for them ever to have lunch together.  One day, Lew Grade was alone in the office when a man came in.  He said, "I am a comedian."  Lew Grade said, "Well, make me laugh."  The routine was very amusing and after, he said to the man, "There's an opening at the Palladium tonight at 8:30 for 50 pounds.  Our fee is 5 pounds."  The man, very exciting, reached into his pocket and all he had was a 10 pound note.  He threw it on the table and ran out.  Lew Grade said, "I learned my first lesson in business ethics that day: should I tell my brother?"

===Family===  
His two brothers, Leslie Grade and Bernard Delfont, were also show business impresarios and his nephew, Michael Grade, carried on the tradition. Michael was Chairman of the BBC from 2004 to 2006 and became executive chairman of ITV plc on 8th January 2007.

A sister to Lew, Leslie and Bernie, Rita (1924&ndash;1992) was born in the UK, by which time the family was living in Streatham, south London. She married a Twickenham doctor, Joe Freeman (1912&ndash;1979), in 1949. They had two sons, Ian Freeman (1950&ndash;), a PR consultant and freelance journalist, and Andrew Freeman (1962&ndash;), a corporate accountant.

===ITC Entertainment===

In the 1950s, as Britain prepared for commercial Independent Television Company was formed to bid for a spot.  Although initially rejected due to its size and potential power, it eventually joined with the Associated Broadcasting Development Company to form The Adventures of Robin Hood'', commissioned by an American producer, yet produced in Britain.  Its eventual success would lead Grade to a drive to create and produce for the world, leading to later accusations of making TV "for Birmingham, Alabama, not Birmingham, England." and ATV's eventual downfall in 1981. ''Private Eye'' regularly referred to Grade as "Low Greed".

===Television success===

Lew Grade is best known by viewing audiences as the man responsible for a number of cult British TV series through his The Saint'', ''Supercar'', ''Stingray'', ''Thunderbirds'',  ''UFO'' and ''Space: 1999''.  Although supportive of the produced shows, the consistent  drive for success at home and abroad led to various artistic differences for Grade with McGoohan and Anderson, leading to the departure of both.

===The Muppets===
In the mid-1970s, Grade approached American puppeteer syndicated block of its programming and if it were produced by someone else.  After watching one of Henson's pilots and recalling a special made in one of his studios, Grade decided to let Henson create his show in England and distribute it through ATV (in the United Kingdom to the ITV network) and ITC (for the United States and worldwide distribution).  Grade's action was instrumental in bringing ''The Muppet Show'' to the screen in 1976 and led to its wide success on both sides of the Atlantic and around the world.  Henson chose to immortalize the great producer through the character Lew Lord (played by Orson Welles) in ''The Muppet Movie''.  Some also speculate Muppet Dr. Bunsen Honeydew is also a caricature of Grade.

===Jesus of Nazareth===
His other successes as a producer included the award-winning ''Jesus of Nazareth'' (1977), starring Robert Powell - ironically, as Grade was Jewish (as, of course, was the title character). Grade had unique success in selling to the American market. The mini-series secured a record breaking $12m. He also promoted extravagant 'quality' productions on ATV to prove its equal to BBC TV, for instance giving over a whole evening schedule to a live broadcast of "Tosca" from La Scala starring Maria Callas.

===The Beatles===
Grade's professional life had also intertwined with the famed British rock group Queen Elizabeth II.  This was a big moment for the rising band prior to their appearance on ATV Music Publishing bought majority share in Northern Songs, the company that owned nearly all of the Beatles' works.  After a fierce battle, Grade and ATV won control of the company while controlling any other song works by Paul McCartney and John Lennon between 1964 and 1971.  (George Harrison broke from Northern Songs prior to Grade's acquisition.) ATV would retain control of Northern Songs until 1985, when the company sold the songs to a more controversial owner: Michael Jackson.

===Major films===

In 1975, Grade and ITC released the film ''The Return of the Pink Panther'' into theaters with assistance of United Artists and with director Blake Edwards and Peter Sellers in his role of Inspector Clouseau. Originally conceived as a TV series, Grade saw the potential of reviving the Pink Panther film franchise by turning it into a motion picture.  Although there was tremendous controversy with Grade turning the project into a movie, a compromise was eventually made where United Artists would distribute the film in the United States while ITC would distribute for the rest of the world. When the Pink Panther film was a huge hit, it not only revived the franchise (which UA would resume on its own), but also made Grade move into films, hoping to have the same success as he had in television. While having notable films and modest successes in this period, the biggest success would come through 1979's ''The Muppet Movie'', partially tied to his successful deal with Jim Henson and the popularity of ''The Muppet Show''. Keeping his ideas about class alongside showmanship, Grade would also become the producer of Ingmar Bergman films ''Autumn Sonata'' and ''From the Life of the Marionettes''.

In 1980, Grade backed an expensive 'all-star' film version of On Golden Pond'' and ''Sophie's Choice'', as well as cult classic ''The Dark Crystal'', which was the final project Jim Henson created in association with Grade and ITC.