《群体的智慧：多数人为何聪明于少数人和集体的智慧如何塑造商业、经济、社会与民族》一书，首次出版于2004年，作者是詹姆斯•索诺维尔基。在这本书中，作者阐述和主张这样一个观点：团体中，信息的集合往往有利于作出比每一个成员单独所做的决定要好得多的决策。作者在书中陈述大量实例研究和轶闻来说明观点，而且涉及到若干领域，其中主要的有经济学和心理学。

作者在本书开篇讲述了一个轶闻，是弗朗西斯•高尔顿对所述观点的支持：一个郡县里，全体社区成员对牛重量估测的平均数十分接近真实值甚至是相当准确无误的。而这个平均数要比大多数成员的估量更接近牛的真实重量，也比任何一个熟悉牛的行家所作的单独存在的推测接近真实量。

这本中所阐述的对单独的个人判断的多种化的收集，不同于传统意义上理解的集体心理学。它却与统计学上的抽样理论有着极为相似的地方——一个通过集合了那些单独存在的个人判断所得到的结论，似乎更能够具有典型性，这种典型性代表了全体人类所能够想到的可能的结果，从而得到较为恰切的预言。

'''''The Wisdom of Crowds:   Why the Many Are Smarter Than the Few and How Collective Wisdom Shapes Business, Economies, Societies and Nations''''', first published in 2004, is a book written by James Surowiecki about the aggregation of information in groups, resulting in decisions that, he argues, are often better than could have been made by any single member of the group. The book presents numerous case studies and anecdotes to illustrate its argument, and touches on several fields, primarily economics and psychology.

The opening anecdote relates Francis Galton's surprise that the crowd at a county fair accurately guessed the weight of an ox when their individual guesses were averaged (the average was closer to the ox's true butchered weight than the estimates of most crowd members, and also closer than any of the separate estimates made by cattle experts).<ref>
Introduction (page XII): Although Surowiecki's description of the "averaging" calculation (page XIII) implies that Galton first calculated the ''mean'', inspection of the original 1907 paper indicates that Galton considered the ''median'' the best reflection of the crowd's estimate. ( ). Galton's quotation from the end of this paper (given by Surowiecki on page XIII) actually refers to the surprising proximity of the median and the measurement, and not to the (much closer) agreement of mean and measurement (which is the context Surowiecki gives it in). The mean (only 1 pound, rather than 9, from the Ox's weight) was only calculated in Galton's subsequent reply to a letter from a reader, though he still advocates use of the median over any of the "several kinds" of mean (). </ref>

The book relates to diverse collections of independently-deciding individuals, rather than sampling, but there is little overt discussion of statistics in the book.

Its title is an allusion to Charles Mackay's ''Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds,'' published in 1841.

== Types of crowd wisdom ==

Surowiecki breaks down the advantages he sees in disorganized decisions into three main types, which he classifies as:
; Cognition
: Market judgment, which he argues can be ''much'' faster, more reliable, and less subject to political forces than the deliberations of experts, or expert committees.
; Coordination
: Coordination of behavior includes optimizing the utilization of a popular bar and not colliding in moving traffic flows. The book is replete with examples from naturally occurring experiments such as pedestrians optimizing the pavement flow, or the extent of crowding in popular restaurants. He examines how ''common understanding'' within a culture allows remarkably accurate judgments about specific reactions of other members of the culture.
; Cooperation
: How groups of people can form networks of trust without a central system controlling their behavior or directly enforcing their compliance. This section is especially pro-free market.

== Four elements required to form a wise crowd ==

Not all crowds (groups) are wise. Consider, for example, mobs or crazed investors in a Failures of crowd intelligence (below) for more examples of unwise crowds.  According to Surowiecki, these key criteria separate wise crowds from irrational ones:

; Diversity of opinion
: Each person should have private information even if it's just an eccentric interpretation of the known facts. 
; Independence
: People's opinions aren't determined by the opinions of those around them.
; Decentralization
: People are able to specialize and draw on local knowledge.
; Aggregation
: Some mechanism exists for turning private judgments into a collective decision.

== Failures of crowd intelligence == 

Surowiecki studies situations (such as rational bubbles) in which the crowd produces very bad judgment, and argues that in these types of situations their cognition or cooperation failed because (in one way or another) the members of the crowd were too conscious of the opinions of others and began to emulate each other and conform rather than think differently. Although he gives experimental details of crowds collectively swayed by a persuasive speaker, he says that the main reason that groups of people intellectually conform is that the system for making decisions has a systematic flaw.

Surowiecki asserts that what happens when the decision making environment is not set up to accept the crowd, is that the benefits of individual judgments and private information are lost, and that the crowd can only do as well as its smartest member, rather than perform better (as he shows is otherwise possible). Detailed case histories of such failures include:
; Too homogeneous
: Surowiecki stresses the need for diversity within a crowd to ensure enough variance in approach, thought process, and private information. 
; Too centralized
: The Columbia shuttle disaster, which he blames on a hierarchical NASA management bureaucracy that was totally closed to the wisdom of low-level engineers. 
; Too divided
: The intelligence analysts in this case) work best when they choose for themselves what to work on and what information they need. (He cites the SARS-virus isolation as an example in which the free flow of data enabled laboratories around the world to coordinate research without a central point of control.)
:The Office of the Director of National Intelligence and the CIA have created a Wikipedia style information sharing network called Intellipedia that will help the free flow of information to prevent such failures again.
; Too imitative
: Where choices are visible and made in sequence, an "information cascade"<ref>Sushil Bikhchandani, David Hirshleifer, Ivo Welch. October 1992. "A Theory of Fads, Fashion, Custom, and Cultural Change as Informational Cascades." ''Journal of Political Economy'', Vol. 100, No.5, pp. 992-1026.</ref> can form in which only the first few decision makers gain anything by contemplating the choices available: once past decisions have become sufficiently informative, it pays for later decision-makers to simply copy those around them. This can lead to fragile social outcomes.
; Too emotional
: Emotional factors, such as a feeling of belonging, can lead to peer pressure, herd instinct, and in extreme cases collective hysteria.

== Is it possible to be too connected? ==
Surowiecki spoke on [http://waderoush.typepad.com/twr/2005/03/james_surowieck.html Independent Individuals and Wise Crowds, or Is It Possible to Be Too Connected?].

:The question for all of us is, how can you have interaction without information cascades, without losing the independence that’s such a key factor in group intelligence?

He recommends:

* Keep your ties loose.
* Keep yourself exposed to as many diverse sources of information as possible.
* Make groups that range across hierarchies.

Tim O’Reilly<sup>[http://www.oreillynet.com/pub/a/oreilly/tim/news/2005/09/30/what-is-web-20.html?page=3]</sup> and others also discuss the success of Google, wikis, blogging and Web 2.0 in the context of the wisdom of crowds.
 
== Applications ==