'''Supertouring''', FIA for national touring car racing in 1994, based on the 2.0 L formula created for the British Touring Car Championship in 1990. 

Supertouring replaced Group A as the norm in nearly every touring car championship across the world, but escalating costs and the withdrawal of works teams caused the category to collapse in the late 1990s. The cars looked like regular road cars, while expensive changes had to be made to provide space for racing tyres inside the standard wheel arches. 

An example for this was the German Super Tourenwagen Cup (STW) series, which ran from 1994 to 1999, after the end the 2.5 L V6-powered Deutsche Tourenwagen Meisterschaft in 1996. In 2000, the Deutsche Tourenwagen Masters resumed with 4.0 L V8-powered cars.

==Regulations==
thumb|200px|Renault Laguna built to Supertouring regulations competing in the British Touring Car Championship
The Supertouring Car was required to be a minimum of 4.20 meters in length with four doors, effectively requiring a small family car as a minimum. No more than 2 litres engine capacity or 6 cylinders were permitted, and the engine was required to be normally aspirated. Only two wheels could be driven and steered.<ref></ref> For homologation, initally at least 2500 units of the model used must have been produced. In 1995, in a bid to counter the increasing numbers of homologation specials this was increased to at least 25,000 units.<ref>[http://www.supertouring.co.uk/techreg1.html BTCC Technical Regulations]</ref>

There was no restriction on body size and doors until 1993, when it was changed to only allow cars with a minimum of four doors and no smaller than the Small Family Car' class, although 'Large Family Car' tends to dominate the category. Until 1995, teams were only permitted to fit aerodynamic device that were available through dealers, but that changed when, in 1994 BTCC season, Alfa Romeo entered a 155 with 850 Estate to their 4-door model the following season when they found themselves to be disadvantaged by the new rules. In the Italian Supertourismo category, teams entered extended spoilers without complaints.

Alfa Romeo also homologated 2500 road cars, which was the minimum, for that season to allow their 1.8 L car with an advantage of a higher rev limit to enter, that was also changed to only non-homlogated consumer models to enter.

Some series however, would change the rules to suit crowd demands and competition from rival series, one example, was the NSX in the JGTC, leaving Corona EXIVs and Chasers. In 1999, a new formula using spaceframe cars came to nothing and the series was abandoned altogether as by then Japan's big three all had works entries in the JGTC.

In Australia, the series began in 1993 when the Group A regulations for the Australian Touring Car Championship series was replaced by V8 Supercar and Supertouring. The advent of a new management structure and telelcast arrangement for V8Supercar put them in conflict with Bathurst 1000 organisers. Supertouring were offered the chance to compete at Bathurst after race organisers could not come to terms with V8 Supercar. Bathurst City Council and V8 Supercar came to a separate arrangement to host their own breakaway "Australian 1000 Classic" race. Supertouring did not become a viable option and the third and final race was transformed into a motorsport carnival with several categories attending and the Supertouring event halved to 500 kilometres, before collapsing in the aftermath of the 1999 race. In 2000 in the absence of a rival the V8 Supercar event took up the Bathurst 1000 name.

Unfortunately, during the Supertouring's long run, the category would suffer two fatal accidents. In 1995 Phillip Island and Kieth O'Dor, at Avus were involved in fatal accidents as a result of a broken neck caused by their cars' being t-boned. Soon after, rollcages in competition cars with built in side impact bars and seats with head restraints on the side would become mandatory.

Le '''supertourisme''' était une catégorie de voitures de tourisme de circuit en sport FIA. 

Elle était destinée à remplacer les anciennes voitures de tourisme Groupe A circuit. Les voitures éligibles pour cette catégorie, étaient des berlines familiales 4 ou 5 portes, produites au minimum à 20&nbsp;000 exemplaires par an, et équipées de moteurs 2 litres atmosphériques dont la puissance avoisinait les 300 ch.

Disputée dans de nombreux championnats de voitures de tourisme nationaux dans la seconde partie des années 90 (Championnat de Grande-Bretagne, France, Allemagne,...), cette catégorie sera finalement abandonnée au début des années 2000 en raison de l'escalade des coûts engendrés par son règlement. Ainsi, le championnat de France passera à la réglementation FIA.

En France, le championnat Supertourisme conserva son appellation, malgré le remplacement des voitures Supertourisme par des Silhouette en 2001. Ce championnat a vécu sa dernière saison en 2005.

En 2006, seul le championnat de France GT subsiste au plus haut niveau avec un plateau de grande qualité. 