'''Jean Maitron''' (French historian specialist of the labour movement. A pioneer of such historical studies in France, he introduced it to University and gave it its archives base, by creating in 1949 the ''Centre d'histoire du syndicalisme'' (Historic Center of Trade-Unions) in the Sorbonne, which received important archives from activists such as Paul Delesalle, Émile Armand, Pierre Monatte, and others. He was the Center's secretary until 1969. 

Maitron, however, is best known for his ''Dictionnaire biographique du mouvement ouvrier français'' (DBMOF or, more currently, ''le Maitron''), a comprehensive biographical dictionary of figures from the French workers' movement which was continued after his death, and, last but not least, a study of anarchism, ''History of anarchism in France'' (first ed. 1951), which has become a classic. Starting with the 1789 French Revolution, it includes 103.000 entries gathered by 455 different authors working under Maitron's direction. The ''Maitron'' has now extended itself with international versions, treating Austria (1971), United Kingdom (1979 and 1986), Japan (1979), Germany (1990), China (1985), Morocco (1998), United States from 1848 to 1922 (2002), a transnational one about the Komintern (2001) and the most recently published about Algeria (2006), almost all published at the ''Éditions de l'Atelier''.

Jean Maitron also founded and directed two reviews, ''L'Actualité de l'Histoire'' and then ''Le Mouvement social'', which were directed after his death by Madeleine Rebérioux (1920-2005) then Patrick Fridenson (currently director of studies at the EHESS).

==Biography==
Born in a family of teachers with Communist ideas, Jean Maitron joined the Trotsky advocated fusion with the defeat of France, he immediately organized support for political prisoners, and accepted the post of secretary of Asnières's section of the Syndicat national des instituteurs trade-union (which was a member of the Fédération de l'éducation nationale).

After the war, Maitron supported laïcism against Parti Socialiste Unifié (PSU)'s foundation in 1960. Maitron left the PSU in January 1968, when it considered merging with the Fédération de la gauche démocrate et socialiste (FGDS).

Maitron wrote in 1950 a study on the anarchism movement in France and wrote a complementry study of Paul Delessale, an anarcho-syndicalist. He retired in 1976 and was nominated as ''chevalier de la Légion d'honneur'' in 1982 and a ''chevalier des Arts et Lettres'' in 1985. Jean Maitron was cremated at the Père Lachaise cemetery and his ashes dispersed.

'''Jean Maitron''', né le historien français spécialiste du mouvement ouvrier.

Pionnier de l'histoire ouvrière en France, il l'a fait entrer à l'université et lui donne ses bases archivistiques, avec la création du Centre d'histoire du syndicalisme à la Sorbonne. Ses publications englobent des ouvrages de référence, notamment le ''Dictionnaire biographique du mouvement ouvrier français'', poursuivi après sa mort et appelé couramment « le Maitron », et une histoire de l'anarchisme. Jean Maitron a fondé et dirigé deux revues : ''L'Actualité de l'histoire'' puis ''Le Mouvement Social''.

En 1996, la Fédération de l'éducation nationale crée le prix Jean-Maitron qui récompense un travail d'étudiant qui prolonge son œuvre. Une collection de livres d'histoire sociale porte également son nom.

Son œuvre est poursuivie par une équipe dirigée par CNRS / Université de Paris I). En 2006, une nouvelle série du dictionnaire, prévue en douze volumes, a vu le jour. Intitulée ''Dictionnaire biographique, mouvement ouvrier, mouvement social'', elle couvrira la période 1940-1968.