'''Nexhmije Pagarusha''' (* Pagarusha bei Mališevo im Kosovo) ist eine ehemalige jugoslawische Sängerin und Schauspielerin.

Nach ihrer musikalischen Ausbildung in Belgrad war sie seit den 1950er Jahren die bekannteste albanischsprachige Sängerin Jugoslawiens. Daneben war sie als Schauspielerin auf der Bühne und für Fernsehproduktionen tätig. Sie beendete ihre Karriere 1984.

Als ihr bekanntestes Lied gilt ''Baresha'' (Die Hirtin), das von ihrem Ehemann Rexhep Mulliqi komponiert und von dem Schriftsteller Rifat Kukaj getextet wurde; in dem annähernd sechs Minuten langen Lied wechseln sich ein langsamer 7er-Rhythmus und ein schneller 9er-Rhythmus ab. In den 1960er Jahren trat sie gemeinsam mit dem Folklore-Ensemble ''Shota'' auch im Ausland (u. a. Deutschland, Österreich, Israel und Bulgarien) auf. 1973 trat sie mit dem Lied ''E vetmja dashuri'' (Nur die Liebe) beim ''Jugovizia'' (jugoslawischer Vorentscheid zum Eurovision Song Contest) an, bei dem sich jedoch nie ein albanischsprachiger Titel durchsetzen konnte.

'''Nexhmije Pagarusha''' (born Albanian singer and actress from Kosovo.

== Biography ==
Nexhmije Pagarusha was born in the small village of Albanian), near the town of Malisheva, in the Kingdom of Yugoslavia (now Republic ofKosova). She is an ethnic Albanian. She finished the primary school in Malisheva and then went to Belgrade, where she attended three years in the school of music, in the solo canto section. 

She began her music carrier as a singer for Radio Prishtina in 1948.

Her music creative work lasted for almost 40 years, and it is very hard to say, which genre she belongs to, because she sang almost all of them. Her interpretations in folk music were exactly as perfect as her interpretations in the classic music, especially opera.

Pagarusha was loved by the music critics and adored from the music admires. She was called ''Bilbili i Kosovës'' (Nightingale Of Kosovo), queen of the Albanian music, Madam Butterfly, etc.

She gained great popularity not just in her country but also in other European lands, such as Macedonia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria etc. She led a several tours with the music assemble ''Shota'' in this lands, and also in Israel.

In her land she gained the title ''Këngëtare e shekullit'' (Singer of the century).

The song ''Baresha'' (Heardswoman) is one of her most popular songs. It was composed by her husband, Rexhep Mulliqi and the text was written by Rifat Kukaj.

Pagarusha played in many theater stages and movies and also as an actress she won many prizes.

She ended her music carrier in 1984 after a concert in Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina.

In 2000 she appeared with one song: ''Për ty'' (For you) in one Albanian TV show, after 16 years of absence.