'''Харки''' (слово не склоняется, , от арабского ''харка'', стандартн. арабский ''харака'' حركة, «воин» или «наступление», то есть «военное ополчение, формирование») — так назывались военнослужащие из  местных формирований алжирских мусульман (Алжирской войны. Затем термин харки распространился на всех алжирских мусульман, симпатизировавших Франции и поддерживавших присоединение Францию, где харки положили начало формированию многочисленной мусульманской общины. Для алжирцев термин харки стал синонимом предательства и сотрудничества с врагами.

== История ==

Несмотря на то, что подавляющее большинство алжирцев после арабских завоеваний были арабоязычными мусульманами суннитского толка, в конце XIX — начале XX веков значительную часть населения тогда ещё Французского Алжира составляли довольно многочисленные и влиятельные в культурном и экономическом плане немусульманские группы франкоязычных европейцев и евреев, получившие название берберских групп, элита которых постепенно сблизилась с французской. Несмотря на огромную религиозную дистанцию, со временем, в ходе процесса аккультурации, ряд местных мусульман воспринял ассимилировался и перешёл в католичество именовались «эвольвэ» (, буквально «эволюционировавшие», «развившиеся»). Большинство франкоалжирцев, а также симпатизирующих им офранцуженных мусульман-харки были вынуждены массово покинуть страну после войны за независимость, переехав во Францию в 1960-х годах.

== См. также ==

'''''Harki''''' (adjective from the collaborator". In France, the term is used to designate the ''Franco-musulmans rapatriés'' ("repatriated French Muslims") community living in the country since 1962, and its metropolitan born descendants. In this sense the term ''Harki'' now refers to a distinct ethnocultural group, i.e. Franco-Algerian Muslims distinct from other French of Algerian origin or Algerians living in France. 

== Before the Algerian conflict ==

Algerian Muslim regular soldiers had served in large numbers with the French "''Armée d'Afrique''" (Army of Africa) from 1830 as spahis (cavalry) and tirailleurs (lit. skirmisher, i.e. infantry). They played an important part during the Franco-Prussian War of 1870 and the First World War (1914–1918).

During World War II North African troops serving with the French Army numbered more than 200,000. They made a major contribution during the liberation of France and the campaigns in Italy and Germany of 1944-45.

Tirailleurs from Algeria, Morocco and West Africa fought in Fall of Dien Bien Phu (1954).

== During the Algerian War ==

With the outbreak of the Algerian War that same year, the loyalty of the Algerian Muslim soldiers to France inevitably came under heavy strain and some of the regular units were transferred from Algeria to France or Germany, following increased incidences of desertion or small-scale mutiny. As a partial replacement, the French administration recruited the Harkis as irregular militia based in their home villages or towns throughout Algeria. Initially raised as self-defence units, the Harkis, from 1956 on, increasingly served alongside the French Army in the field. They were lightly armed (often only with shotguns), but their knowledge of local terrain and conditions made them valuable auxiliaries to French regular units.  

According to General R. Hure (''L'Armee d' Afrique 1830-1962''), there were by 1960 approximately 150,000 Muslim Algerians serving in the French Army or as auxilaries. In addition to volunteers and conscripts serving in regular units this total took into account 95,000 Harkis (including 20,000 in separate ''mokhazni'' district forces and 15,000 in ''commando de chasse'' tracking units). It was a recurring claim by the French authorities that more Algerian Muslims were serving with their forces than with those of the nationalist Front de Libération Nationale (FLN).

According to US Army data, possibly compiled at a different date, the Harkis numbered about 180,000, more than total FLN effectives <ref name="Peterson"> Major Gregory D. Peterson, ''The French Experience in Algeria, 1954-62: Blueprint for U.S. Operations in Iraq'', Ft Leavenworth, KS: conventional formations. Harkis served either in all-Algerian units commanded by French officers or in mixed units. Other uses included platoon or below sized units attached to French battalions. A third use involved Harkis in intelligence gathering roles, with some reported minor pseudo-operations in support of intelligence collection <ref> John Pimlott, "The French Army: From Indochina to Chad, 1946-1984," in Ian F. W. Beckett and John Pimlott, ''Armed Forces & Modern Counter-Insurgency,'' New York: St Martin's Press, 1985, p.66 </ref>. 

The motives of the Harkis were mixed. The FLN targeted both collaborators and rival nationalist groups and some Algerians enrolled in the Harkis to avenge the deaths of relatives. Others were defectors from the FLN rebel forces who had been persuaded by one means or another to change sides. A major source was from families or other groups who had traditionally given service to France.  From the viewpoint of Algerian nationalists all were traitors. However at independence guarantees were given by both signatories of the March 1962 cease fire ("Accords d'Evian" signed by France and the Algerian FLN), that no one, Harkis, ''Pieds-Noirs (Algerian-born Europeans with French nationality) would suffer reprisals after independence for any action during the civil war.

== After the war ==

In Pieds-Noirs and seeking refuge in Metropolitan France. However, some officers of the French army disobeyed and tried to assist the Harkis under their command, as well as their families, to escape from Algeria. On the other hand, the OAS far-right terrorist group initiated a campaign of bombings following the Evian Accords, and tried to block the Pieds-Noirs population from leaving the country. About 91,000 Harkis (including family members) were able to find refuge in France. As feared, there were widespread reprisals against those who remained in Algeria. It is estimated that somewhere between 50,000 and 150,000 Harkis and their dependents were killed by the FLN or by lynch mobs in Algeria, sometimes in circumstances of extreme cruelty.<ref>[http://www.enotes.com/genocide-encyclopedia/harkis Harkis: Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity]</ref> In "A Savage War Of Peace" Alistair Horne writes: "Hundreds died when put to work clearing the minefields along the Morice Line, or were shot out of hand. Others were tortured atrociously; army veterans were made to dig their own tombs, then swallow their decorations before being killed; they were burned alive, or castrated, or dragged behind trucks, or cut to pieces and their flesh fed to dogs. Many were put to death with their entire families, including young children."

By contrast the regular Muslim troops (who had the option of continuing to serve in the French Army) were only occasionally subject to reprisals. Some leaders of the new Algerian Republic were themselves veterans of the French Army, which had prior to independence provided one of the few avenues for advancement open to the Muslim majority. 