'''Romeo y Julieta''' is the name of two brands of premium Altadis SA. thumb|300px|right|The Romeo y Julieta logo

==History==

The Romeo y Julieta marque was established in 1875 by Inocencio Alvarez and Mannin Garcia.  The brand is named for the Shakespeare tragedy, Romeo and Juliet.

Between Cabañas factory in Havana, and his firm, Rodríguez, Argüelles y Cia, in 1903.  Being a very cosmopolitan man, Rodriguez constantly travelled across Europe and the Americas, actively promoting his brand, and entering his horse, the aptly named ''Julieta'', in racing events across the world.
thumb|300px|right|Dominican Romeo y Julieta
As a result of his salesmanship, the brand became exceptionally popular around the world among wealthy customers, many of whom demanded personalized bands for their cigars.  At its height, as many as 2000 personalized cigar bands were produced for customers.  The brand was also known at this time for specializing in ''figurado'' cigars, such as perfectos and pirámides, with over a thousand such shapes believed to have been in production.

Sir Winston Churchill was perhaps the brand's most famous devotee.  The flagship ''vitola'' of the brand is named in his honor, a long 7" by 47 ring gauge cigar known as the Churchill.  Nellie Tayloe Ross, the first woman to serve as governor of a state in the U.S., also frequently smoked them.

After Rodriguez's death in revolution, and the subsequent nationalization of the tobacco industry, the brand was moved to La Romana in the Dominican Republic, where production of a Romeo y Julieta cigar for the American market continues today under the direction of Altadis SA.  The Cuban government nationalized the brand and still produces and distributes it world-wide as one of its top-selling global brands.

In 2006, a new addition was made to the regular Romeo y Julieta lineup.  The Short Churchill size, a Robusto, was introduced at the 8th Annual Habanos Festival in Havana, Cuba in 2006.

Romeo y Julieta also produces three machine-made cigarillos: minis, clubs and puritos

thumb|300px|right|Logo di Romeo y Julieta
'''Romeo y Julieta''' è una delle marche di Montecristo. Fondata nel 1875 da Inocencio Alvarez e Josè Manin García, è però solo nel 1903, quando viene rilevata dallo spagnolo Josè Rodríguez (detto ''Don Pepin'') che la marca raggiunge la notorietà mondiale.

Grande ''promoter'' in questo senso, e vero ''testimonial'' della marca, fu il famoso politico inglese Winston Churchill che, oltre ad esser stato un grandissimo appassionato di sigari cubani tanto da aver dato il proprio nome ad un formato o vitola tuttora molto diffuso, ebbe modo di affermare in diverse occasioni la sua grande predilezione per questa marca, o meglio per il suo ''Churchill''. 

Il nome Romeo y Julieta deriva ovviamente dall'opera di William Shakespeare Romeo e Giulietta. L'amore di ''Don Pepin'' per questo romanzo fu tale che è noto che cercò in diverse occasioni di acquistare il palazzo dei Capuleti a Verona.

Oggi Romeo y Julieta è di proprietà di ''Habanos'', la società al 51% del Governo cubano ed al 49% della multinazionale del tabacco franco-spagnola Altadis, e presenta un ''vitolario'' o catalogo molto ampio, probabilmente il più ampio insieme a quello di Partagàs, che presenta sigari cosiddetti ''premium'' (ovverosia fatti interamente a mano e con foglia lunga) e sigari economici, fatti a macchina e rifiniti a mano. 