'''Hober Mallow''' è un personaggio del ''Fondazione'', noto in Italia anche come ''Cronache della Galassia'').

== Biografia ==

Originario di Smyrno, uno dei Quattro Regni che confinano con Terminus, Mallow è il Capo dei Mercanti della Fondazione e pilota dell'astronave Far Star. Viene inviato in missione su Korell per scoprire il destino di alcune navi della Fondazione perse in quel settore e ad investigare la possibilità che Korell abbia sviluppato una tecnologia nucleare.

Appena Mallow atterra sul pianeta centrale del Sistema, un missionario della Fondazione cerca protezione a bordo della ''Far Star''. Una folla di Korelliani attende il religioso fuori della nave e chiede che venga consegnato per processarlo. Mallow, sospettando un inganno, lo consegna di buon grado e prosegue la sua missione, aprendo il commercio con il Commodoro di Korell. Mallow ne trae grande profitto personale e diviene uno degli uomini più ricchi di Terminus. Nel corso delle discussioni di affari, scopre che i Korelliani hanno effettivamente accesso alla tecnologia nucleare tramite l'Impero.

'''Hober Mallow''' is a fictional character in ''Foundation''.

== Fictional biography ==
Mallow is a Master Trader in the Foundation and captain of the ''Far Star''.  Originally from Terminus, Mallow is a freelance trader and considered among the best of his class.  He is sent to Korell on a mission to discover the fates of three Foundation ships lost in that sector, as well as to investigate the possibility that Korell has developed nuclear technology.   

Mallow avoids a trap (a member of the secret police disguised as a Foundation priest) set by the Commdor of Korell, and arranges for a profitable trade between Korell and the Foundation. When he returns to Terminus, he is accused of being a traitor for not spreading the Foundation's nuclear-based pseudo-religion and for allowing a Foundation missionary to be killed.  He defends himself successfully at trial, exposing the "missionary" as a member of the Korellian Secret Police.  On the back of the resultant publicity, he then wins the mayoral election, becoming the leader of Terminus.  

As Mayor, Mallow leads the Foundation through its third Seldon Crisis.  In this instance, the crisis involved an impending war with Korell and those remnants of the Empire which back them.  Mallow's solution, reminiscent of Salvor Hardin's years before, is to make the Korellian economy (as well as the livelihood of its population) dependent on Foundation merchandise. The “war” ends three years later as one of "the least fought wars in Galactic History", as quoted in the Encyclopedia Galactica, and Mallow transforms the power and influence of the Foundation from chiefly religious to primarily economic, turning Terminus into a successful plutocracy. 