thumb|WWP buildings, from a building on its west
thumb|Looking east from 10th & 49th, Three Worldwide Plaza in foreground; Two WWP behind it; One WWP in background
thumb|South side
Built in 1989, '''One Worldwide Plaza''' is part of a three-building, mixed-use commercial and residential complex located in the borough of Eighth Avenue, Ninth Avenue, 49th Street, and 50th Street.  Located on the west side of Eighth Avenue, One Worldwide Plaza is built on the site of New York City's third 50th Street subway station is underneath.

Designed by PBS mini-series and a companion book ''Skyscraper: The Making of a Building'' by Karl Sabbagh (ISBN 978-0140152845).

One Worldwide Plaza is a 49-story, 1.5 million square feet (139,355 m²),  tall office skyscraper.  The building has three separate entrances to accommodate the various tenants in the building, which include the law firm of Cravath, Swaine & Moore and the international advertising agency of Ogilvy & Mather.  The base of the building is made of granite and precast concrete.  The tower facade is made of brick.  The building is crowned by a copper roof and glass pyramid known as "David's Diamond" after the architect, David Childs.  
thumb|left|View of public plaza with fountain in foreground and Two WWP and Three WWP in background, from southeast
thumb|left|Vew of One WWP, public plaza, and fountain, from southwest

A mid-block public plaza separates One Worldwide Plaza from the residential buildings of Two Worldwide Plaza and Three Worldwide Plaza.  The public plaza is a bonus space granted under New York City Department of City Planning.  The creation and maintenance of the public plaza resulted in permission to build additional floors in the office tower.  The landscaping of the plaza contains over 40 trees and numerous plantings, and a cafe.  The center of the plaza is highlighted by a fountain created by Sidney Simon called "The Four Seasons".  Four female statues hold up a globe; each represents a season. Public seating is available year round. Model for the female statues is the expansionist painter Molly Ackerman, who studied at the Art Students League of New York and lives nowadays in Leiden in the Netherlands. She's married to the Dutch photographer Fred Rohde.  They are the owners of the Expansionist Art Empire Gallery.   

right|250px|thumb|Le One Worldwide Plaza

Le '''One Worldwide Plaza''' est un complexe composé de deux gratte-ciel à New York, dont la construction s'est achevée en 1989. Il est situé entre la Huitième avenue et la Neuvième Avenue, et entre la 49 et la 50 rue, à l'emplacement du 3e Madison Square Garden. Le One Worldwide Plaza est un immeuble de bureaux commerciaux, alors que les bâtiments voisins ''Two Worldwide Plaza'' et ''Three Worldwide Plaza'' sont essentiellement à vocation résidentielle. 

Le One Worldwide Plaza mesure 237 mètres, et compte 49 étages. La surface totale de bureaux commerciaux est de 139,355 m², et le bâtiment compte trois entrées afin de satisfaire au mieux les différents locataires. Le cœur du bâtiment est essentiellement composé de Skidmore Owings & Merrill, qui est actuellement en charge de la construction de la PBS, et baptisé ''Skyscraper: The Making of a Building'': « Gratte-ciel: la construction d'un bâtiment ».

La Worldwide Plaza est composée de trois bâtiments, séparés d'un demi ''block''. La ''Plaza'' est un espace vert, situé au centre de l'ensemble, et qui fut accordé par les urbanistes de la ville. La création et la gestion de cet espace public amena à la construction d'étages supplémentaires dans la tour de bureau. La plaza comporte aujourd'hui une quarantaine d'arbres, ainsi que de nombreuses plantations, et le centre de la plaza est mis en valeur par une fontaine, créée par Sidney Simon et baptisée 
« Les quatre saisons » ; cette fontaine est composée de quatre statues féminines, qui tiennent chacune un globe représentant une saison. 