right|thumb|350px|''Windsor Castle in Modern Times'' by [[Edwin Landseer|Landseer depicts the Queen and the Prince Consort "at home" in the 1840s.]]

The term "'''Victorian fashion'''" refers to fashion in clothing in the Victorian era, or the reign of Queen Victoria (1837&ndash;1901). It is strictly used only with regard to the United Kingdom and its colonies, but is often used loosely to refer to Western fashions of the period. It may also refer to a supposedly unified style in clothing, home décor, manners, and morals, or a culture, said to be prevalent in the West during this period.

==Usefulness of the term==
thumb|right|An extreme class contrast in attire, 1871
Those who have studied the period in detail would protest vacuous generalizations. Clothing, décor, manners, and morals varied from year to year, country to country, and class to class. Whether or not there is a ''style'' or unified ''culture'' connecting a Scottish fisherwoman, for example, and an aristocratic London lady, might well be debated. 

If we carefully restrict our language, however, and take Victorian fashion to refer to the dress, or in a wider sense, the culture of an upper-middle-class London family of fashion and conventional attitudes, and describe it as it varied from decade to decade, we may be able to usefully describe these phenomena. 
We can also usefully speak of contemporary stereotypes of the Victorian era. These stereotypes, while not historically valid, help us understand current uses of the term "Victorian".

==Historical overview==
Several general style trends of the Victorian era transcend any one facet of fashion, but rather had broad influence across clothing styles, architecture,  literature, and the decorative arts.  Many of these had their roots in the 18th century but flowered in the Victorian age.  These include:
*Orientalism
*The romanticising of the Scottish Highlands
*The Pre-Raphaelites and Artistic Dress
*Aestheticism
right|thumb|200px|Overview of women's fashions, 1794-1887

The dress reform and ''rational dress''.

===Clothing===

:''See also fashion by decades:'' 1830s - 1840s  - 1850s - 1860s - 1870s - 1880s- 1890s

Methods of clothing production and distribution varied enormously over the course of Victoria's long reign. 

In 1837, cloth was manufactured (in the mill towns of northern England, Scotland, and Ireland) but clothing was generally custom-made by seamstresses, milliners, tailors, hatters, glovers, corsetiers, and many other specialized tradespeople, who served a local clientele in small shops. Families who could not afford to patronize specialists, made their own clothing, or bought and modified used clothing. 

By 1907, clothing was increasingly factory-made and sold in large, fixed price department stores. Custom sewing and home sewing were still significant, but on the decline. 

New machinery and materials changed clothing in many ways. 

The introduction of the lock-stitch trim that would have been prohibitively time-consuming if done by hand. Lace machinery made lace at a fraction of the cost of the old, laborious methods. 

New materials from far-flung British colonies gave rise to new types of clothing (such as rubber making gumboots and mackintoshes possible). Chemists developed new, cheap, bright dyes that displaced the old animal or vegetable dyes.

====Women's clothing====
thumb|300px|right|A satire on the evolution of 19th-century fashion
Women's fashionable clothing began with a straight, Regency silhouette, bloomed into exaggerated skirts and sleeves, moved to small shoulders and even wider skirts supported by hoops, and narrowed by way of the bustle to hobble skirts.

Charles Frederick Worth, the "father of haute couture" and the prototype of the fashion designer as the dictator of modes, was a London draper who relocated to Paris in the 1840s.  His success led to the fall of Paris fashion houses as arbiters of style and the preferred clothiers for upper-class women in both Britain and US.

Reactions to the elaborate confections of French fashion led to various calls for reform on the grounds of both beauty (Artistic and Aesthetic dress) and health (dress reform).  Arthur Lasenby Liberty challenged the dominance of French fashion when he showed English gowns in Paris at the end of the century.

====Men's clothing====
Men's fashionable clothing was perhaps the least volatile, but there was still an enormous difference between the wasp waist and suits and Norfolk jackets of 1901. During the 1840s, casual wear became popular. Casual clothing included neckties and scarves. Shirts were commonly made of linen and were black, grey and other neutral colors. Special occasion dress would often include tailored coats specific for the occasion.

===Home décor===

Home decor started spare, veered into the elaborately draped and decorated style we today regard as Victorian, then embraced the retro-chic of William Morris as well as pseudo-Japonaiserie.

thumb|Gazette-muotilehden kuvitusta, kävelyllä rannalla 1859.

'''Viktoriaaninen muoti''' viittaa 1800-luvun pukeutumis- ja sisustustyyliin, romanttiseen tyyliin. Tyyli on saanut nimensä Ison-Britannian kuningatar Viktorian mukaan.

Naisten viktoriaaniselle pukeutumistyylille tunnusomaista ovat pitkät hameet, korsetit ja korkeat kaulukset. Pukeutuminen oli peittävää. Rusketusta vältettiin ja hienot naiset käyttivät hansikkaita sekä pitsisiä päivänvarjoja. Muoti vaihteli kuten tänäkin päivänä ja muutokset näkyivät siluetissa, hameen koossa ja muodossa, hihoissa, kaula-aukoissa, väreissä ja vyötärölinjassa. Siluettiin voitiin vaikuttaa korsetilla ja monenlaisilla korostavilla alusvaatteilla kuten krinoliinilla. Muotiin vaikuttivat myös teollisuuden edistysaskeleet, kuten tekstiiliteollisuuden kehittyminen ja valmistumistapojen muuttuminen nopeammiksi ja eullisemmiksi. Tärkeä keksintö oli ompelukone, joka yleistyi 1860-luvulla. Ompelukoneen myötä vaatteet tietenkin halpenivat. Esim.1870-luvulla muotivaatteet olivat erittäin monimutkaisia ja täynnä kankaisia koristeita, pitsiä ja laskoksia. Tämän on tulkittu johtuneen pitkälle siitä, että vaatteet oli helpompaa ommella täyteen koristusta, ja se tehtiin kun se oli mahdollista. Samoin krinoliini, jonka tarkoitus oli korvata kymmenet painavat alushameet, leveni lopulta käytännössä niin suureksi kuin se oli mahdollista tehdä ja hameista tuli valtavia. 

Viktoriaaniseen aikaan liittyy surupukeutuminen perheessä tai suvussa kuolleen henkilön muistoksi. Surupuvut olivat mustia ja sen ajan mittapuun mukaan yksinkertaisia ja naiset – varsinkin lesket – saattoivat käyttää suruhuntua. Miehet pukeutuivat arkisinkin tummaan, joten heidän surupukeutumisensa ei juuri eronnut tavallisesta. Suruajan pituus vaihteli surijan sukupuolen ja edesmenneen henkilön läheisyyden perusteella. Kuningatar Viktoria pukeutui puolisonsa kuoleman jälkeen loppuelämänsä mustaan.