thumb|250px|General Enrique Líster at the [[Battle of the Ebro, 1938.]]
'''Enrique Líster Forján''' (Spanish military officer. 

A stonemason, he lived his adolescence in Cuba, before returning in 1925 and joining the Communist Party of Spain (PCE). His involvement with the revolutionary movement forced his exile until 1931, when the Second Spanish Republic was proclaimed. In 1931, he took part in the cuban uprising against dictator Machado. Between 1932 and 1935 Líster received training in the Frunze Military Academy, one of the most respected in the former Soviet Union, and as the Spanish Civil War started, he joined the Republican Army. 

As a high-rank Republican Army official, commanding the 11th division of the republican army, Líster was instrumental in the defense of Madrid and other important military actions. As a divisional commander, he helped stall the Nationalist attack along the Jarama and played a significant role in the successful Republican counterattack in the Battle of Guadalajara.

Líster is widely regarded as a Brunete, Teruel and Ebro campaigns. Propaganda concerns meant that Lister often continued costly frontal assaults against strategically insignificant targets - to do otherwise would have been an indictment of the increasingly Communist controlled Republican administration. Lister also showed a lack of experience in his insistence on slowing any advance to mop up isolated enemy strongpoints rather than leaving them to second line troops. Lister shared these flaws along with fellow Communist commanders El Campesino and Juan Modesto, with whom he often failed to cooperate, leading to further operational problems.

After the end of the Civil War, Líster took refuge in Moscow, later fighting in World War II as a Red Army general; during the Second World War, he took part in the breaking of Leningrad's siege (January 1944). According to Christopher Andrew and Oleg Gordievsky, in late 1959 Fidel Castro's intelligence chief Ramiro Valdés contacted the KGB in Mexico City, the Soviets sent over one hundred mostly Spanish-speaking advisors, including Enrique Líster Forján, to organize the Committees for the Defense of the Revolution in Cuba.

He was a general of the Yugoslav People's Army, making him the only person to have been a general in three different armies.

'''Энрике Листер''' - (Пятого полка", 11-й дивизии в республиканской армии во время гражданской войны в Испании. Долгое время был важной фигурой в испанском коммунистическом движении, в Коммунистической Партии Испании и политической жизни Испании в целом. В юные годы вступил в Испанию и жил в Москве, где работал на строительстве метро и учился с 1932 по 1935 год в Академиии Фрунзе. В 1935 году вернулся в Испанию и стал работать в вооруженных силах Республики по заданию Коммунистической партии Испании, участвовал в битвах при Хараме, Гвадалахаре, Тируэле, Эбро. С началом войны оказался одним из самых подготовленных военных специалистов в Второй Испанской Республики жил в изгнании в Москве, воевал в рядах Красной Армии, участник снятия блокады Ленинграда. Был генералом трех армий - испанской (республиканской), советской, югославской. Написал две книги - "Наша война" (Nuestra guerra (1966)), Memorias de un luchador (1977).

Категория:История Испании
Категория:Участники Гражданской войны в Испании
Категория:Гражданская война в Испании
Категория:Персоналии по алфавиту
Категория:Родившиеся 21 апреля
Категория:Родившиеся в 1907 году
Категория:Умершие 8 декабря
Категория:Умершие в 1995 году