Il termine '''camp''' si riferisce all'uso deliberato, consapevole e  sofisticato del  Sessanta, negli anni  Ottanta, periodo dell'ampia diffusione del discorso  Postmoderno applicato all'arte ed alla cultura.

==Origine del Termine==
Il termine camp compare per la prima volta nel 1909, all’interno del 
Passing English of the Victorian Era, in cui è spiegato come un termine 
significante:

:"''Actions and gestures of exaggerated emphasis. Probably from French. Used chiefly by persons of exceptional want of caracter''" ("Azioni e gesti di enfasi esagerata. Probabilmente di origine francese. Usato principalmente da persone che dimostrano un'eccezionale mancanza di carattere”).
Nello stesso anno, anche l'Oxford English Dictionary propone una definizione per camp:

:"''ostentatious, exaggerated, affected, theatrical; effeminate or homosexual; pertaining to or characteristic of homosexuals. So as n., ‘camp’ behaviour, mannerisms, etc.; a man exhibiting such behaviour.''" ("ostentato, esagerato, teatrale, effeminato o omosessuale; riguarda le caratteristiche dell'omosessualità. Come nome, comportamento camp, maniere camp, etc.; un uomo che esibisce un tale comportamento").

E ne sottolinea l'origine: "''etimologicamente oscura''".

==Susan Sontag e le sue "''Notes On Camp''"==

Susan Sontag esamina per prima la sensibilità camp nella cultura Occidentale: nel 1964 publica “Notes on camp”, saggio che diventerà il punto di 
partenza per ogni futura riflessione sull’argomento. In realtà lo scritto della  Sontag oggi non costituisce più di un semplice riferimento che, seppur 
necessario, è comunque profondamente distante dalle analisi più recenti. 
Innanzitutto Susan Sontag scrive circa quarant’anni fa, descrivendo la 
società e la realtà ad essa contemporanea: si tratta degli anni in cui il camp 
nasce e procede parallelo con la rivoluzione sessuale e con le legittimazioni 
degli omosessuali. Ella stessa mette in luce frequenti collegamenti tra la 
sensibilità camp e l’omosessualità: 
:"''Homosexuals have pinned their integration into society on promoting the aesthetic sense. Camp is a solvent of morality. It neutralizes moral indignation, sponsors playfulness''". ("Gli omosessuali hanno ritrovato la loro integrazione nella società nella promozione del loro senso estetico. Il camp può cancellare la moralità. Neutralizza l’indignazione morale, promuove ciò che è scherzoso")

L’autrice, con il suo saggio, rende accessibile il concetto di camp, caratterizzandolo di quelle connotazioni omosessuali che descrive con un’accezione di elogio e definendolo in un modo adatto al “consumo” pubblico. 
Susan Sontag non fa che dare il via ad una serie di riflessioni sull’argomento che, per tutto il decennio successivo, si pongono in un’ottica di evoluzione dalle note della scrittrice statunitense. Lentamente i confini del discorso divengono più labili e l’elemento dell’omosessualità comincia ad acquisire un ruolo differente all’interno del discorso. Si tratta di un ruolo comunque importante, ma che mostra il camp come un fenomeno più ampio abbandonando tutta la serie di referenze, valori e morali condivise riguardo all’omosessuale come tipo sociale. 
 
A partire dalla fine degi anni  Sessanta il termine camp viene adottato per 
indicare diversi atteggiamenti, una sensibilità da contestualizzare.

'''''Camp''''' is an bad taste or ironic value. When the term first appeared in 1909, it was used to refer to Notes on 'Camp'" emphasised artifice, frivolity, naïve middle-class pretentiousness and shocking excess as key elements.

Camp films were popularized by filmmaker John Waters, including ''Hairspray'' and ''Polyester'',  Celebrities that are associated with camp personas include Divine (postmodern views on art and culture.

== Origins and development ==
''Camp'' derives from the French slang term ''se camper'', meaning “to pose in an exaggerated fashion”.  The OED gives 1909 as the first print citation of ''camp'' as "ostentatious, exaggerated, affected, theatrical; effeminate or homosexual; pertaining to, characteristic of, homosexuals. So as a noun, ‘camp’ behaviour, mannerisms, et cetera. (cf. quot. 1909); a man exhibiting such behaviour".  Per the OED, this sense is "etymologically obscure."

According to writer and theorist Samuel R. Delany, the term ''a camp'' originally developed from the practice of female impersonators and other prostitutes following military encampments to sexually service the soldiers. Later, it evolved into a general description of the aesthetic choices and behavior of working-class homosexual men.  Finally, it was made mainstream, and adjectivised, by Susan Sontag in her landmark essay (see below).

The rise of postmodernism made camp a common perspective on aesthetics, which was not identified with any specific group. The attitude originally was a distinctive factor in pre-Stonewall swish and drag. With swish featuring extensive use of superlatives, and drag being exaggerated female impersonation, camp became extended to all things "over the top", including '''female''' female impersonators, as in the exaggerated Hollywood version of Carmen Miranda. It was this version of the concept that was adopted by literary and art critics and became a part of the conceptual array of 'sixties culture. Moe Meyer  still defines ''camp'' as "queer parody."

== Components==

=== Attitude ===
Camp has been from the start an ironic attitude, embraced by anti-Academic theorists for its explicit defense of clearly marginalized forms. As such, its claims to legitimacy are dependent on its opposition to the status quo; camp has no aspiration to timelessness, but rather lives on the hypocrisy of the dominant culture. It doesn't present basic values, but precisely confronts culture with what it perceives as its inconsistencies, to show how any norm is socially constructed. This rebellious utilisation of critical concepts was originally formulated by modernist art theorists such as sociologist Theodor Adorno , who were radically opposed to the kind of popular culture that consumerism endorsed.

=== Humor and allusion ===
Camp is a critical analysis and at the same time a big joke. Camp takes “something” (normally a social norm, object, phrase, or style), does a very acute analysis of what the “something” is, then takes the “something” and presents it humorously. As a performance, camp is meant to be an allusion.  A person being campy has a generalization they are intentionally making fun of or manipulating. Though camp is a joke it's also a very serious analysis done by people who are willing to make a joke out of themselves  to prove a point.

Another part of camp is ''dishing'', a conversational style including retorts, vicious putdowns, and/or malicious gossip, and showing disrespect, associated with the entertainment industry and also called  "chit chat" .

=== Drag ===
thumb|[[Fudgie Frottage, underground performer and producer of the world's longest running drag king contest where exaggerated displays of masculinity are encouraged and rewarded.]]
As part of camp, drag occasionally consists of feminine apparel, ranging from slight make-up and a few feminine garments, typically hats, gloves, or high heels, to a total getup, complete with wigs, gowns, jewellery, and full make-up. In the case of drag kings or female male-impersonators, the opposite is true and often involves exaggerated displays of traditional male sexuality.

== Contemporary culture ==
=== Television ===

Television shows such as ''Batman'', ''Dynasty'' and ''Dallas'' were popular in the 1980s. Mentos television commercials during the 1990s developed a cult following due to their camp "Eurotrash" humour. 

The ABC After School Specials, which tackled topics such as drug use and teen sex, are an example of camp educational films. In turn, the Comedy Central television show ''Strangers with Candy,'' starring comedienne Amy Sedaris, was a camp spoof of the specials.

In a Monty Python sketch (Episode 22, "Camp Square-Bashing"), the British Army's 2nd Armoured Division has a Military "Swanning About" Precision Drill unit in which soldiers "camp it up" in unison. In the English The Office one of Tim Canterbury's pranks on Gareth Keenan includes a pun on meaning of the word camp.

=== Film ===
Movie versions of camp TV shows have made the camp nature of these shows a running joke throughout the movies. Beat the Devil'' (1953, starring John Waters directed camp films, such as ''Hairspray'', ''Polyester'',  ''Debbie Gibson's "Lost in Your Eyes" plays on a Fisher-Price tape recorder. 

Educational and industrial films form an entire sub-genre of camp films, with the most famous being the much-spoofed 1950s ''Duck and Cover'' film, in which an anthropomorphic, cartoon turtle explains how one can survive a nuclear attack by hiding under a school desk (its British counterpart ''Protect and Survive'' could be seen as kitsch, even though it is very chilling to watch). Many British Public Information Films gained a camp cult following, such as the famous Charley Says series.

===Fashions===
Retro-camp fashion is an example of modern hipsters employing camp styles for the sake of humor. Yard decorations, popular in some parts of suburban and rural America, are examples of kitsch and are sometimes displayed as camp expressions.  The classic camp yard ornament is the pink plastic flamingo. The yard globe, garden gnome, wooden cut-out of a fat lady bending over, the statue of a small black man holding a lantern (called a lawn jockey) and ceramic statues of white-tailed deer are also prevalent camp lawn decorations.

The South of the Border is a Las Vegas and Reno, Nevada, are famous for the camp architecture of the casinos and hotels. In recent years, Wisconsin Dells has developed a camp reputation for its waterparks, waterpark resorts and motel swimming pools featuring foam-and-fibreglass sculptures of dolphins and killer whales.