right|140px 

 is a Japanese woman convicted of putting festival in the Sonobe district of Wakayama, Wakayama Prefecture, Japan. 

==Summary==
A communal pot of curry being served to residents of Sonobe district, Wakayama, was poisoned with at least 1000  grams of arsenic--enough to kill over 100 people, on July 25, 1998.

Two children and two adults quickly sickened and died after consuming the curry, and sixty-three others suffered from acute arsenic poisoning. The dead included the council president and vice president of Wakayama (64-year old Takatoshi Taninaka and 53-year old Takaaki Tanaka), as well as 10 year-old Hirotaka Hayashi and 16-year old Miyuki Torii.<ref name="JapanTimesLawsuit"></ref>

Attention quickly focused on the then 37 year old Hayashi, as she was seen by a witness at the curry dish, and she had easy access to arsenic because her husband was an exterminator. After her arrest, she and her husband were indicted on a number of insurance fraud charges as well. Her husband has since been convicted and imprisoned for insurance fraud. Prior to the murders, Masumi had been an insurance saleswoman. Masumi was also tried with three other attempted murders via poisoning that had occurred during the past 10 years, with the motive in those cases being life insurance benefits. She is believed to have tried to kill her husband at least once. The motive of the mother of four in this case is said to be anger at her neighbors for shunning her family.  The arsenic found in the curry was identical to arsenic she had in her own home from her husband's extermination business.

==Trial==

'''Masumi Hayashi''' est une japonaise de 43 ans et mère de 4 enfants condamnée à mort par pendaison en 2002 pour avoir empoisonné quatre personnes à l'arsenic et intoxiqué soixante-trois autres en 1998 durant une fête d'été, il sagit à ce jour de la seule femme condamnée à mort par la Justice japonnaise depuis plusieurs décennies. La criminelle s'était servi des poisons de son mari qui travaille comme exterminateur de termites et a déja fait 6 ans de prison pour fraude à l'assurance (sa femme étant elle-même une assureuse). Elle aurait été motivée par la colère qu'elle avait pour ses voisins.

Sa condamnation a été validée en 2005 par la Haute Cour d'Osaka alors que ses avocats insistaint sur ces circonstances atténuantes bien qu'ils aient plaidé l'innocence en premier ressort. Un manga a été tiré de l'affaire qui avait été hyper-médiatisée, si bien que plus de 2 000 personnes s'étaient rendues an tribunal pour entendre le verdict.[http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/asia-pacific/2564865.stm]