'''Marsa Alam''' (alias Mersa; en arabe : مرسى علم , romanisation : ''Marsā ‛Alam'') est une ville d’environ 6000 habitants située au bord de la Mer Rouge dans le sud de l’Égypte, à plus ou moins 271 km au sud d’Hurghada et 220 km à l’est d’Edfou. Étant connue auparavant comme un village de pécheurs se trouvant à la jonction de la route longeant la Mer Rouge et celle en direction d’Edfou dans la vallée du Nil, Marsa Alam s’est transformée en une petite ville, surtout grâce au développement du tourisme. C’est d’ailleurs pour cela que l’Aéroport International de Marsa Alam ouvrit en 2001. De nombreux observateurs prévoient que la ville deviendra d’ici quelques années un centre de vacances balnéaires aussi populaire et important que Hurghada ou Charm el-Cheikh.
===Histoire===
Marsa Alam était connue dès l’époque pharaonique pour ses gisements d’or, d’émeraude et de pierre fine tout comme de cuivre et de plomb. La route rejoignant Edfou fut probablement construite sous le règne de Ptolémée II.

<!--''En cours de rédaction''-->

thumb|270px|right| [[Egypt: Site of '''Marsa Alam''' on Red Sea (bottom)]]

Until very recently, '''Marsa Alam''' () was a small fishing village in Egypt, on the west coast of the Red Sea. However, it has rapidly increased in popularity, and since the opening of its International Airport back in 2001, it has started to become yet another favourite holiday destination on the Red Sea Riviera. In fact, most informed observers believe that it is destined to become as popular a resort as Sharm el Sheikh and Hurghada, within the next few years. However, its airport is still small and, as of May 2007, had only one departure gate.

45px|left

Marsa Alam is situated near the Tropic of Cancer where the Arabian Desert meets the Red Sea, and it has the appearance of a tropical paradise with its palm trees, mangroves and sea coasts fringed with barrier coral reefs. It has already gained a strong reputation amongst scuba divers due to its numerous and unspoilt diving sites both along the coast and offshore. Sightings of spinner dolphins, dugongs and hammerhead sharks are a frequent occurrence for those who venture into its waters.

Marsa Alam also has some inland attractions, such as the Emerald Mines and the Temple of Seti I at Khanais, near also is Marsa Alam Airport.