'''Roy Stanley Emerson''' (* 3. November 1936 in Blackbutt, Queensland, Australien) ist ein ehemaliger australischer Tennisspieler.

Aufgewachsen auf einer Farm zog seine Familie bald nach Brisbane, wo er bessere Möglichkeiten hatte am Tennistraining teilzunehmen.
Im Jahr 1961 gewann Emerson seinen ersten Titel bei den australischen Meisterschaften (später französischen Meisterschaften alle Grand-Slam-Titel und war 1964 und 1965 die Nummer 1 in der Welt.

Bekannt als „Emmo“ wurde er zweimal in Wimbledon Sieger im Einzel und dreimal im Doppel. Bei den French Open gewann er im Einzel 1963 und 1967 und gewann im Doppel von 1960 bis 1965 sechs Mal in Folge. Bei den US Open war er zweimal im Einzel und vier Mal im Doppel erfolgreich.

Emerson ist der einzige männliche Spieler, der bei den Grand-Slam-Turnieren alle Titel im Einzel und Doppel gewann. Er hielt bis 2000, als Pete Sampras ihn überflügelte, den Rekord an Einzelsiegen bei Grand-Slam-Turnieren. Er gewann insgesamt 28 Grand-Slam-Titel, davon 16 Siege im Doppel. Außerdem gewann er mit dem australischen Team acht Mal den Titel im Daviscup.

Roy Emerson war ein ausgezeichneter Tennisspieler, doch man darf nicht vergessen, dass er alle seine Titel als Amateursportler gewann, währenddessen die weltbesten Tennisspieler als Profis nicht an diesen Turnieren teilnehmen durften. Wenn Frank Sedgman, Pancho Gonzales, Lew Hoad, Tony Trabert oder Rod Laver an den Turnieren hätten teilnehmen dürfen, wäre es zweifelhaft gewesen, ob Roy Emerson einen Titel im Einzel bei einem Grand-Slam-Turnier gewonnen hätte.

Er wurde 1968 Tennisprofi, genau in dem Jahr, als Profis und Amateure wieder gegeneinander antreten durften. Er konnte den Titel bei den French Open nicht verteidigen, den er 1967 erringen konnte. Im Viertelfinale unterlag er Pancho Gonzales, der zu diesem Zeitpunkt fast vierzig Jahre alt war. In den nächsten Jahren trat Emerson 12 Mal gegen Gonzales an und konnte Pancho Gonzales nicht ein einziges Mal besiegen.

Roy Emerson wurde 1982 in die Hall of Fame des internationalen Tennissports aufgenommen.

Heute wohnt er in Newport Beach in Kalifornien und hat auch ein Haus in Gstaad in der Schweiz, wo er jedes Jahr im Sommer ein Tenniscamp abhält.

'''Roy Stanley Emerson''' (born Grand Slam singles titles and 16 Grand Slam men's doubles titles. He is the only male player to have won singles and doubles titles at all four Grand Slam tournaments. His 28 Grand Slam titles are an all-time record for a male player.  Most of his titles were won in the final years of the period where the Grand Slam events were open only to amateur players, just before the start of the open era when professionals were admitted into tennis' most prestigious events.

==Biography==

Emerson was born on a farm in Blackbutt, Queensland. His family later moved to Brisbane and was able to receive better tennis instruction after attending Brisbane Grammar School and Ipswich Grammar School.

Emerson won his first Grand Slam doubles title in Wimbledon (partnering Australian Championships, beating compatriot U.S. Championships.

Affectionately known as "Emo" on the tour, the six-foot right-hander was known for training hard and always being ready for strenuous matches because of his outstanding level of fitness. He was primarily a serve-and-volley style player, but was also able to adapt to the rigours of slow courts, allowing him to enjoy success on all surfaces.

From 1963 to 1967, Emerson won five consecutive men's singles titles at the Australian Championships. His six Australian singles crowns are a record for a male player.

French Championships singles title, beating Pierre Darmon in the final.

Emerson's first Wimbledon singles title came in 1964, with a final victory over Fred Stolle. Emerson won 55 consecutive matches during 1964 and finished the year with 109 victories out of 115 matches. He won three of the year's four Grand Slam events that year (failing to win only the French Open).

Emerson was the world's No. 1 amateur player in 1964 and 1965 according to Lance Tingay of The Daily Telegraph and in 1967 according to Rex Bellamy.  Emerson, however, probably was not a better player during those years than the professionals Laver and Ken Rosewall. In 1965, he successfully defended his Australian and Wimbledon singles crowns. He was the heavy favourite to win Wimbledon again in 1966, but during his fourth round match he skidded while chasing the ball and crashed into the umpire's stand, injuring his shoulder. He still finished the match, but was unable to win.

Emerson's last Grand Slam singles title came at the French Championships in 1967 - the year before the open era began. His 12 Grand Slam singles titles stood as a men's record until 2000, when it was surpassed by Pete Sampras.

Emerson's final Grand Slam doubles title was won in Jack Kramer, the long-time tennis promoter and tennis great, writes in his Johnny van Ryn could hit a shot like that sometimes, but never so often nor as proficiently as Emerson."

Emerson was also a member of a record eight Davis Cup winning teams between 1959 and 1967.

Emerson's 12 singles and 16 doubles titles make him one of the leading players in Grand Slam history. All his Grand Slam singles titles, however, were won against an amateur field at a time when many of the world's best players had turned professional and were unable to compete in the Grand Slam events.  Kramer, himself a candidate for the title of greatest player of all time, did not consider Emerson worthy of inclusion in his 1979 list of the 21 best players to that date.<ref>Writing in his 1979 autobiography, Kramer considered the best ever to have been either Jack Crawford, Pancho Segura, Frank Sedgman, Tony Trabert, John Newcombe, Arthur Ashe, Stan Smith, Björn Borg, and Jimmy Connors.  He felt unable to rank Henri Cochet and René Lacoste accurately but felt they were among the very best.</ref>  In 1968, moreover, Emerson came into the French Open as the defending champion and lost in the quarterfinals to Pancho Gonzales, who had been the most dominant player in the professional ranks for much of the 1950s but was almost 40 years old by the beginning of the open era. Eight years Gonzales's junior, Emerson seldom managed to beat him in a dozen matches as a professional.  In the Champions Classic of 1970 in Miami, Florida, Emerson did beat Gonzales in straight sets, 6–2, 6–3, 6–2. <ref>''World of Tennis Yearbook 1971'', by John Barrett, page 142</ref>.

Emerson's last good year was in 1973 when he was still in the Top 20 owing to his winning his 105th and final career title at the Pacific Coast Championships in San Francisco.  He defeated Roscoe Tanner, Arthur Ashe, and Bjorn Borg in the last three rounds of that tournament. Then Emerson virtually retired, playing just a few tournaments through 1977. He made a last appearance in the Gstaad, Switzerland tournament in 1983.

Emerson now resides in Newport Beach, California and has a home in Gstaad where he holds a tennis clinic each summer. The main court for the Allianz Suisse Open Gstaad has been named "Roy Emerson Arena" in his honour.  His son, Antony, was an All-American in tennis at the University of Southern California and played on the professional tour briefly. Roy and Antony won the United States Hard Court Father-and-Son title in 1978.  Roy briefly coached promising juniors at East Lake Woodlands in Oldsmar, Fl.  His students included Pat Cash, Kim Warwick, and Derek Damico.

Emerson was inducted into the International Tennis Hall of Fame in 1982.

== Grand Slam singles finals ==  