'''Adam Franz Lennig''' (ultramontanistic German Catholic theologian.

==Life==

Lennig studied at Bruchsal under the private tutorship of the ex-Jesuit Laurentius Doller, and afterwards at the bishop's gymnasium at Mainz, his birthplace. Being too young for ordination, he went to Paris to study Oriental languages under Sylvestre de Sacy, then to Rome for a higher course in theology. Here he was ordained priest, 22 September 1827, and then taught for a year at Mainz. 

Lennig was a strenuous defender of the rights of the Roman Catholic Church, and when on 30 January, 1830, the Government of the Grand Duchy of Hesse &mdash; which for quite a time had been trying to interfere in church matters &mdash; passed thirty-nine articles on ecclesiastical administration, he sent them to Rome. Rome sent back a protest, but, since the bishops remained silent, and since Joseph Vitus Burg, Bishop of Mainz, even defended the articles, Lennig left for Bonn, and attended the lectures of Johann Michael Sailer, Windischmann, and Klee. 

In June 1832, he accepted the pastorate of Gaulsheim, now part of Bingen am Rhein, declining to take the chair of theology and exegesis at Mainz. In 1839 he was made pastor at Seligenstadt. Petrus Leopold Kaiser, Bishop of Mainz, in 1845 promoted him to the cathedral chapter. 

As a mentor of the ultramontanism, he established in March 1848 the Piusverein (Pius Association<ref>[http://www.ohiou.edu/~Chastain/ip/piusasn.htm Pius Association<!-- Bot generated title -->]</ref>). He organized the first Katholikentag (meeting of Catholic societies and of Catholics in general), held at Mainz, October 1848. In the same month he was present at the conference of the German Bishops at Würzburg, acting as representative of his bishop who was ill. About this time he founded at great expense the ''Mainzer Journal''. 

After the death of Bishop Kaiser (30 December, 1848), troubles arose about the choice of a successor. Lennig was acknowledged by all as a leader of true Christian spirit and suffered much abuse from the Liberals. In 1852 he was made vicar general by Bishop Wilhelm Emmanuel von Ketteler, and in 1856 dean of the chapter. He zealously assisted his bishop in bringing the Capuchins and Jesuits into the diocese. In 1854 he was in Rome at the definition of the Immaculate Conception, and later visited Rome twice. 

In 1859 he wrote a protest against the spoliation of the Holy See, and had it signed by 20,000 Catholics.

'''Adam Franz Lennig''' (* 3. Dezember 1803 in Mainz; † 22. November 1866 ebenda) war ein deutscher Theologe.

== Leben ==

Lennig studierte unter dem Tutorium des Ex-Jesuiten Laurentius Doller in Bruchsal, später am bischöflichen Gymnasium in Mainz. Weil er für eine Ordination zu jung war, ging er nach Paris um orientalische Sprachen bei Silvestre de Sacy zu studieren. Anschließend ging er nach  Rom um seine theologische Studien fortzuführen. Hier wurde er auch am 22. September 1827 zu Priester geweiht und ging dann nach Mainz um zu Lehren. 

Lennig war römisch-katholischen Kirche. Als am 30. Januar 1830 die Regierung des Großherzogtums Hessen, die eine ganze Zeit versucht hatte, sich in kirchliche Angelegenheiten zu mischen, 39 Artikel über die kirchliche Verwaltung verabschiedete, schickte er diese nach Rom. Rom schickte ein Protestschreiben zurück, aber da selbst Bischof von Mainz, die Artikel selbst verteidigte, ging Lennig nach Bonn, um die Vorlesungen von Johann Michael Sailer, Karl Joseph Hieronymus Windischmann und Klee zu besuchen . 

Im Juni 1832 ging er als Pfarrer nach Gaulsheim, heute Stadtteil von Bingen am Rhein, obwohl er ein Angebot hatte den Lehrstuhl für  Theologie und Exegese in Mainz zu übernehmen. 1839 wurde er Pfarrer von Seligenstadt. Unter Peter Leopold Kaiser, Bischof von Mainz, wurde er 1845 in das Mainzer Domkapitel aufgenommen. Er ist auf dem Mainzer Hauptfriedhof begraben.