{{Infobox character | name = Charles "Charlie" Edward Eppes
| image = 300px
| first = Pilot Episode 
| last = 
| gender = Male
| age = 32
| occupation = Applied Mathematician<br>FBI Mathematical Consultant
| family = Alan Eppes (father)<br>Don Eppes (brother)<br>Margaret Mann-Eppes (mother, deceased)
| children = 
| portrayer = David Krumholtz
| creator =
}}
'''Dr. Charles "Charlie" Edward Eppes''' (played by David Krumholtz) is a fictional character and protagonist in the CBS crime drama ''Numb3rs''.

He is portrayed as a young mathematical cryptanalyst, for nearly five years, having attained a (now inactive) TS/SCI security clearance. 

==Backstory==
According to Charlie's father, he could multiply 4-digit numbers mentally at age 3 and at the age of 4 required special teachers. In the second grade, he attempted to find a 70-digit base 12 &mdash; Charlie has described himself as "quixotic" in elementary school. A prodigy, he attended Princeton University at the age of 13 after graduating from high school at the same time as his older brother and took Professor Lawrence Fleinhardt's quantum physics course in his first year. They became fast friends, with Larry establishing his academic connections. Charlie published his first mathematical treatise at the age of 14 (in the ''American Journal of Mathematics'') and graduated at the age of 16. In fact, he was the youngest person to ever write a paper of importance.  

It was his paper on the Eppes asymptotics of random matrices, that made him a star in his field.  Following a seminar that heavily criticized this seminal piece many years after its initial publication, Charlie realized that his work with the FBI has prevented him from doing cognitive emergence theory ("the mathematics of the brain")  to rectify this certain inequity, which has delighted Larry. Although he was a child prodigy, Charlie now moreover fears the fact that his best years in his research will never come ahead of schedule again.

Following his five-year studies on random matrices, Charlie worked on orthogonal P=NP problem and published works on H-infinity Control of Non-Linear Systems and cognitive emergence theory. Charlie is a recipient of the Milton Prize. He has presented seminars on zeros of random applied probability. The lecture in which he converted the classroom into a miniature casino for analyzing probabilities is considered an "Eppes Classic". Also, Charlie has taken over Larry's computational physics class when he was asked to do so, and has given a joint lecture on circular motion and the Coriolis effect with Larry.

==Characterization==
Charlie has wild curled hair, is wary of people and frequently enthralled with objects and patterns. His father has said Charlie is easily fascinated, possesses a big heart and is thorough, but he misses certain things completely. Meanwhile, Larry observed that he is "a talented theoretician with an ego problem" and a student once described him as fast-talking and disorganized, to the agreement of Larry. Fleinhardt also accurately noticed that his colleague has a high standard of guilt and is a pragmatist. Charlie is rather fond of providing excessive explanations (e.g., his discussion of chalkboards with a staccato clacking and the aid of a red chalk holder. Nevertheless, if his line of thought is interrupted during a tense moment, as one of restricted foresight, he can become very disgruntled. Further, when deeply concentrating on a particular problem, it seems Charlie is unable to provide insights to other topics for the sake that they are simply needed or wanted — he has to write what is in his head. Like his brother Don, he is characteristically stubborn and obsessive ("one part exuberance, two parts obsession"), especially when it comes to work, but he's rather naïve when it comes to human behavior. The latter often interferes with his FBI work and, thus, is the cause of much distress for him at times. 

He is extremely talented in supergravity theory and papers on gravity waves, and Renaissance man and that even math and physics majors had to have a course on English). Thus, his father likes playing Scrabble with him.

==Evolution over the series==
The episode "Uncertainty Principle" is significant for the backstory it gives on the familial relationships, particularly Charlie's difficulty in dealing with his mother's death from cancer. While it's unclear how Don reacted, Charlie spent the last three months of his mother's life isolated in the garage, incessantly working on one of the P vs NP; it's a point of contention between the brothers. Also, Charlie doesn't think Don understood what he went through during their school years, especially how he was treated as "Don's brainiac little brother" by his peers in high school, and how he often left him to his own resources as a child, though he was not as inept as Don had reasoned. However, Charlie's relationship with Don remains strong, as he has begun to increasingly fear for his brother's safety on the job and still looks to his older brother for acceptance. Charlie and his father worry about Don committing to relationships, and feared that he had been cheating on Robin Brooks. Ironically, Charlie has similar problems with women himself. After a couple dozen murder cases, Charlie is somewhat jaded and world-weary like his brother. FBI agent David Sinclair of Don's team has even commented that he has never seen two brothers so similar and yet so different. In "The Janus List", the brothers seem to take on each other's tendencies a bit.

In "Prime Suspect," Charlie purchases the beautiful Craftsman family home from his father, who continues to live with him. Now 30 years old, Charlie wants to be responsible and take care of his father but still believes that much of the pressures involving their dad has been put on his shoulders as Don doesn't seem to have enough time. Realizing this, Alan had set his sights on moving out to accomplish things on his own, with Charlie seemingly supporting the idea, but has since chosen to stay as he favors his son's company. Recently, Charlie was bothered by his father trying to impose his will on him with maintaining the house, as he is a full Einstein his father looked into information on the physicist and understood his son's predicament. Charlie also feels guilty about the amount of time his parents, particularly his mother, who always was attuned to his way of thinking, spent with him as a child; he even asks his mother (JoBeth Williams) in a dream if she regrets the time away from Don and Alan because of the special attention he needed growing up. 

Charlie's research often interferes with his relationships: as with Amita on their first date, for all they could talk about is mathematics; Fleinhardt said that it was a common interest and they should not struggle to avoid the subject. Charlie and Amita had several false starts. Charlie has also spent some time with his ex-girlfriend, Susan Berry (neuroscientist from London. He had lived with Susan for two years, and Larry described this as his very own Berry's phase. However, she later revealed that she is currently involved with someone else and had to return to England. Charlie attempted to start a relationship with Amita once more, though her job offer at Harvard University had strained this possibility and made him distraught for some time. Eventually, she decided to take the alternative offer at CalSci with the hope to begin a romantic relationship with him, though his fear of possible failure caused him to question whether he wanted this second chance; Don cautioned him about such an attitude. Amita noticed his ambivalence and wasn't certain if she wanted to back out of the relationship, but he then pushed it forward. Pressures from their colleagues over the inappropriateness of the relationship nearly cost them, but by the end of the third season their romantic involvement stabilized and they have grown considerably closer. He felt rejected when Amita did not want him to meet her father, due to his expectations about the men she dates. Initially, he wondered if it was based on him being Jewish, but the problem is that he is not Indian-born. Alan explained that Mr. Ramanujan would like him after meeting him. Charlie and Amita stated that they love each other, and have even decided to move in together, though, the actual living arrangement has not been determined.

Unforeseen complications with his work emerged as the new Chair of the CalSci Physics, Mathematics, and Astronomy Division, Dr. Mildred Finch, in the episode "Waste Not", made Charlie head of the department." In the episode "Take Out", Charlie and Millie attended a black tie reception for CalSci fundraising and bonded. Soon after, Charlie was asked by Millie to meet with Macmillan Pharmaceuticals, which according to Amita has a reputation for exploiting third-world countries. Amita served as his conscience in this matter, and he went to see Dr. Finch about it. With "Pythagorean wit ," he dazzled Macmillan and is to serve as a mathematical consultant for the pharmaco-kinetic modelling project, only under the proviso that CalSci will administer the trials and monitor the drug at every step, all computational analyses are conducted by Charlie and his team, and 5% of the gross will go to third-world AIDS organizations chosen by Professors Eppes and Ramanujan . In "Democracy", as part of his duties, he recruits the young fantasy baseball and sabermetrics fanatic Oswald Kittner (Jay Baruchel), who shows great promise, to attend CalSci.

{{Infobox personaggio fittizio
| TitoloSerie = Numb3rs
| nome = Charlie Eppes
| immagine = 
| didascalia = 
| primo episodio= 1.01, "Punto di origine"
| ultimo episodio= 
| causa = 
| soprannome = 
| sesso = maschile 
| età = 
| datanascita = 
| professione = professore universitario di matematica applicata
| famiglia = &#32;
*Alan Eppes<br>(padre)
*Don Eppes<br>(fratello)
| razza= 
| relazione = &#32;
*Amita Ramanujan<br>(fidanzata)
| figli = 
| attore = David Krumholtz
| doppiatore = Francesco Pezzulli
| creatore = 
}}

'''Charlie Eppes''' è un personaggio immaginario della serie televisiva americano David Krumholtz, mentre nella versione italiana è doppiato da Francesco Pezzulli.

==Caratteristiche==
Genio della universitario, utilizza tale scienza e le discipline ad essa collegate per risolvere casi per conto dell'FBI, dove lavora il fratello Don Eppes.
In un episodio della prima stagione il padre, parlando con l'agente dell'FBI complessità P contro NP, tuttora irrisolto. Ha un rapporto speciale con il fratello, sebbene non riesca a relazionarsi con molte persone. Come spesso dice il padre, Charlie è ancora in cerca dell'approvazione del fratello maggiore, al quale deve far capire quanto vale. Charlie riesce a stare ore su un problema senza parlare con nessuno e isolandosi da tutti. Inoltre rimane visibilmente turbato quando non riesce a trovare la soluzione per qualcosa e a volte non mancano scatti di rabbia o nervosismo. In realtà è una persona molto simpatica e amichevole, piena di sentimenti. Durante la serie avrà inoltre una relazione con Amita, che è innamorata di lui dalla prima stagione. 