frame|Coastal lagoons fronted by barrier [[spit (landform)|spits typically have entrances that migrate through time. Here, the entrance has been fixed by '''jetty''' construction. Carlsbad, CA, USA,  April 1998.]]
A '''jetty''' is any of a variety of structures used in dock, and maritime works which are generally carried out in pairs from river banks, or in continuation of river channels at their outlets into deep water; or out into docks, and outside their entrances; or for forming current or for accommodating vessels, they are sometimes formed of high open timber-work, sometimes of low solid projections, and occasionally only differ from '''breakwaters''' in their object.  The term derived from the French word ''jetée'', "to throw", and signifies something thrown out.

==For regulating rivers==
Formerly jetties of timber-work were very commonly extended out, opposite one another, from each bank of a river, at intervals, to contract a wide channel, and by concentration of the current to produce a deepening of the central channel; or sometimes mounds of rubble stone, stretching down the dikes pointing somewhat upstream (see River engineering).

==For berthing at docks==
Where docks are given sloping sides, openwork timber jetties are generally carried across the slope, at the ends of which vessels can lie in deep water or more solid structures are erected over the slope for supporting coal-tips. Pilework jetties are also constructed in the water outside the entrances to docks on each side, so as to form an enlarging trumpet-shaped channel between the entrance,  lock or tidal basin and the approach channel, in order to guide vessels in entering or leaving the docks. Solid jetties, moreover, lined with quay walls, are sometimes carried out into a wide dock, at right angles to the line of quays at the side, to enlarge the accommodation; and they also serve, when extended on a large scale from the coast of a tideless sea under shelter of an outlying breakwater, to form the basins in which vessels lie when discharging and taking in cargoes in such a port as Marseilles.

==At entrances to jetty harbors==
400px|thumb|Aerial view of Jetties at [[Humboldt Bay (United States)|Humboldt Bay harbor entrance. The jetties mitigated bad habits of shifting sands and guarantee 700 feet in width at one of the most treacherous bar crossings in the world.<ref>http://www.humboldtbay.org/harbordistrict/documents/hbmp2007/s2-c2_harbor.pdf.</ref>]]
The approach channel to some ports situated on neap tides, on which open timber-work is erected, provided with a planked platform at the top raised above the highest tides. The channel between the jetties was originally maintained by sluicing basins; but it is now often considerably deepened by sand-pump dredging. It is protected to some extent by the solid portion of the jetties from the inroad of sand from the adjacent beach, and from the levelling action of the waves; whilst the upper open portion serves to indicate the channel, and to guide the vessels if necessary (see Harbor). The bottom part of the older jetties, in such long-established jetty ports as Calais, Dunkirk and Ostend was composed of clay or rubble stone, covered on the top by fascine-work or pitching: but the deepening of the jetty channel by dredging, and the need which arose for its enlargement - led to the reconstruction of the jetties at these ports. The nes jetties at Dunkirk were founded in the sandy beach, by the aid of compressed air, at a depth of 22 3/4 ft. below low water of spring tides; and their solid masonry portion, on a concrete foundation was raised 50 ft. above low water of neap tides.

==At lagoon outlets==
A small tidal rise spreading tidal water over a large expanse of lagoon or inland back-water causes the influx and efflux of the tide to maintain a deep channel through a narrows no longer confined by a bank on each side, becomes dispersed, and owing to the reduction of its scouring force, is no longer able at a moderate distance from the shore effectually to resist the action of tending to form a continuous beach in front of the outlet. Hence a bar is produced which diminishes the available depth in the approach channel. By carrying out a solid jetty over the bar, however on each side of the outlet, the tidal currents are concentrated in the channel across the bar, and lower it by scour. Thus the available depth of the approach channels to Charleston harbour, formerly constructed of fascines, weighted with stone and logs, but subsequently of rubble stone, and by the two converging rubble jetties carried out from each shore of Dublin bay for deepening the approach to Dublin harbour.

==Rivers==

===At the outlet of tideless rivers===
Jetties have been constructed on each side of the outlet Baltic, with the objects of prolonging the scour of the river and protecting the channel from being shoaled by the littoral drift along the shore. The most interesting application of parallel jetties is in lowering the bar in front of one of the mouths of a deltaic river flowing into a tide - a virtual prolongation of its less sea, by extending the scour of the river out to the bar by banks. Jetties prolonging the Sulina branch of the Danube into the Black Sea, and the south pass of the Mississippi into the Gulf of Mexico, formed of rubble stone and concrete blocks, and respectively, have enabled the discharge of these rivers to scour away the bars obstructing the access to them; and they have also carried the sediment-bearing waters sufficiently far out to come under the influence of littoral currents, which, by conveying away some of the sediment, postpone the eventual formation of a fresh bar farther out (River engineering).

'''Pirs''' - portowa budowla hydrotechniczna w postaci sztucznego półwyspu wysuniętego w głąb wody prostopadle lub skośnie do brzegu lub nabrzeża, lub w postaci sztucznej wyspy, a w przypadku pirsów największych - również w postaci estakadą (podobnie jak portach lotniczych. Są to przedłużenia hali głównej terminalu lotniczego, zazwyczaj węższe od niej. Od pirsów odchodzą rękawy, kryte przejścia, którymi można się bezpośrednio przedostać na pokład samolotu.

Pirs stanowi rozwinięcie linii brzegowej w porcie. Jest zaopatrzony w urządzenia cumownicze oraz przeładunkowe. Służy przede wszystkim do obsługi statków o większym zanurzeniu, większej wyporności, gorszej manewrowości, lub też do obsługi statków przewożących materiały niebezpieczne, np. o zwiększonym zagrożeniu pożarowym. Duże pirsy mogą posiadać własne pomieszczenia magazynowe i place składowe. Z pirsu mogą prowadzić w stronę lądu taśmociągi, rurociągi itp. Na pirsie, oprócz dróg dojazdowych, może również znajdować się bocznica kolejowa oraz urządzenia takie, jak wywrotnica wagonów. Zazwyczaj pirsy są przeznaczone do przeładunku określonych materiałów, np. pirs węglowy, pirs żeglugi pasażerskiej.

Również porty infrastrukturę niż pomosty.

Pirsy mogą spełniać również inne funkcje, np. rozdzielać części portu, stanowić dodatkowe wewnętrzne falochrony itp.

Brzeg pirsu, do którego może przybić jednostka pływająca, to nabrzeże.