thumb|200px|Flag of [[Democratic Kampuchea]]

The '''Khmer Rouge''' (<span=2 style="font-size: 20pt">ខ្មែរក្រហម</font>; Kmae Krɑhɑɑm) was the ruling political party of Cambodia&mdash;which it renamed the Democratic Kampuchea&mdash;from 1975 to 1979. 

The term "Khmer Rouge," meaning "Red Khmer" in French, was coined by Cambodian English speakers. It was used to refer to a succession of Communist parties in Cambodia which evolved into the '''Communist Party of Kampuchea''' ('''CPK''') and later the '''Party of Democratic Kampuchea'''. The organization was also known as the '''Khmer Communist Party''' and the '''National Army of Democratic Kampuchea'''.

The Khmer Rouge is remembered mainly for the deaths of an estimated 1.5 million people or 1/5 of the country's total population (estimates range from 850,000 to two million) under its regime, through communist party and looked to the Vietnamese Communists for guidance. It became more Stalinist and anti-intellectual when groups of students who had been studying in anti-colonialist ideas of the PCF, which its leaders had acquired during their education in French universities in the 1950s. The Khmer Rouge leaders were also privately very resentful of what they saw as the arrogant attitude of the Vietnamese, and were determined to establish a form of communism very different from the Vietnamese model and also from other Communist countries, including China.

After four years of rule, the Khmer Rouge regime was removed from power in 1979 as a result of an invasion by the Socialist Republic of Vietnam and was replaced by moderate, pro-Vietnamese Communists. It survived into the 1990s as a resistance movement operating in western Cambodia from bases in Thailand. In 1996, following a peace agreement, their leader Pol Pot formally dissolved the organization. Pol Pot died on 15 April, 1998, having never been put on trial.<ref name = "Economist0707">[http://www.economist.com/world/international/displaystory.cfm?story_id=9441341  How the mighty are falling].''The Economist''</ref>

==Origins==
===The Cambodian left: the early history=== 
The history of the communist movement in Cambodia can be divided into six phases: the emergence of the Indochinese Communist Party (ICP), whose members were almost exclusively Vietnamese, before World War II; the ten-year struggle for independence from the French, when a separate Cambodian communist party, the Kampuchean (or Khmer) People's Revolutionary Party (KPRP), was established under Vietnamese auspices; the period following the Second Party Congress of the KPRP in 1960, when Saloth Sar (Pol Pot after 1976) and other future Khmer Rouge leaders gained control of its apparatus; the revolutionary struggle from the initiation of the Khmer Rouge insurgency in 1967-68 to the fall of the Lon Nol government in April 1975; the Democratic Kampuchea regime, from April 1975 to January 1979; and the period following the Third Party Congress of the KPRP in January 1979, when Hanoi effectively assumed control over Cambodia's government and communist party.

Much of the movement's history has been shrouded in mystery, largely because successive purges, especially during the Democratic Kampuchea period, have left so few survivors to recount their experiences. One thing is evident, however: the North Vietnamese Communists helped the movement grow by providing political and military support, but became bitter rivals upon the success of Khmer Rouge. In the three decades between the end of World War II and the Khmer Rouge victory, the appeal of Communism to Western-educated intellectuals (and to a lesser extent its more inchoate attraction for poor peasants) was tempered by the apprehension that the much stronger Vietnamese movement was using communism as an ideological rationale for dominating the Khmer. The analogy between the Vietnamese communists and the Angkorian period. 

In 1930 Ho Chi Minh founded the Vietnamese Communist Party by unifying three smaller communist movements that had emerged in northern, central and southern Vietnam during the late 1920s. The name was changed almost immediately to the Indochinese Communist Party (ICP), ostensibly to include revolutionaries from Cambodia and Laos. Almost without exception, however, all the earliest party members were Vietnamese. By the end of World War II, a handful of Cambodians had joined its ranks, but their influence on the Indochinese communist movement and on developments within Cambodia was negligible. 

Geneva Conference, they controlled as much as one half of the country. 

In 1951 the ICP was reorganized into three national units&mdash;the Vietnam Workers' Party, the Lao Itsala, and the Kampuchean (or Khmer) People's Revolutionary Party (KPRP). According to a document issued after the reorganization, the Vietnam Workers' Party would continue to "supervise" the smaller Laotian and Cambodian movements. Most KPRP leaders and rank-and-file seem to have been either Khmer Krom, or ethnic Vietnamese living in Cambodia. The party's appeal to indigenous Khmers appears to have been minimal. 

According to Democratic Kampuchea's version of party history, the Viet Minh's failure to negotiate a political role for the KPRP at the 1954 Geneva Conference represented a betrayal of the Cambodian movement, which still controlled large areas of the countryside and which commanded at least 5,000 armed men. Following the conference, about 1,000 members of the KPRP, including Son Ngoc Minh, made a "Long March" into North Vietnam, where they remained in exile. In late 1954, those who stayed in Cambodia founded a legal political party, the Pracheachon Party, which participated in the 1955 and the 1958 National Assembly elections. In the September 1955 election, it won about four percent of the vote but did not secure a seat in the legislature. Members of the Pracheachon were subject to constant harassment and to arrests because the party remained outside Sihanouk's political organization, Sangkum. Government attacks prevented it from participating in the 1962 election and drove it underground. Sihanouk habitually labeled local leftists the Khmer Rouge, a term that later came to signify the party and the state headed by Pol Pot, Ieng Sary, Khieu Samphan, and their associates. 

During the mid-1950s, KPRP factions, the "urban committee" (headed by Tou Samouth), and the "rural committee" (headed by Sieu Heng), emerged. In very general terms, these groups espoused divergent revolutionary lines. The prevalent "urban" line, endorsed by North Vietnam, recognized that Sihanouk, by virtue of his success in winning independence from the French, was a genuine national leader whose neutralism and deep distrust of the United States made him a valuable asset in Hanoi's struggle to "liberate" South Vietnam. Champions of this line hoped that the prince could be persuaded to distance himself from the right wing and to adopt leftist policies. The other line, supported for the most part by rural cadres who were familiar with the harsh realities of the countryside, advocated an immediate struggle to overthrow the "feudalist" Sihanouk. In 1959 Sieu Heng defected to the government and provided the security forces with information that enabled them to destroy as much as 90 % of the party's rural apparatus. Although communist networks in Phnom Penh and in other towns under Tou Samouth's jurisdiction fared better, only a few hundred communists remained active in the country by 1960.

===The Paris student group===
During the 1950s, Khmer students in Paris organized their own communist movement, which had little, if any, connection to the hard-pressed party in their homeland. From their ranks came the men and women who returned home and took command of the party apparatus during the 1960s, led an effective insurgency against Lon Nol from 1968 until 1975, and established the regime of Democratic Kampuchea. 

Marx. 

<!-- This following paragraph needs sources documenting the intelligence of the group-->
Another member of the Paris student group was Ieng Sary. He was a Chinese-Khmer born in 1925 in South Vietnam. He attended the elite Institut d'Etudes Politiques de Paris'' (more widely known as ''Sciences Po'') in France. Khieu Samphan, considered "one of the most brilliant intellects of his generation," was born in 1931 and specialized in economics and politics during his time in Paris. In talent he was rivaled by Hou Yuon, born in 1930, who was described as being "of truly astounding physical and intellectual strength," and who studied economics and law. Son Sen, born in 1930, studied education and literature; Hu Nim, born in 1932, studied law. 

These men were perhaps the most educated leaders in the history of Asian communism. Two of them, Khieu Samphan and Hou Yuon, earned doctorates from the Monivong. Three of the Paris group forged a bond that survived years of revolutionary struggle and intraparty strife, Pol Pot and Ieng Sary married Khieu Ponnary and Khieu Thirith (also known as Ieng Thirith), purportedly relatives of Khieu Samphan. These two well-educated women also played a central role in the regime of Democratic Kampuchea. 

The intellectual ferment of Paris must have been a dizzying experience for young Khmers fresh from Phnom Penh or the provinces. A number turned to orthodox Marxism-Leninism. At some time between 1949 and 1951, Pol Pot and Ieng Sary joined the French Communist Party, the most tightly disciplined and orthodox Marxist-Leninist of Western Europe's communist movements. In 1951 the two men went to East Berlin to participate in a youth festival. This experience is considered to have been a turning point in their ideological development. Meeting with Khmers who were fighting with the Viet Minh (and whom they subsequently judged to be too subservient to the Vietnamese), they became convinced that only a tightly disciplined party organization and a readiness for armed struggle could achieve revolution. They transformed the Khmer Students' Association (KSA), to which most of the 200 or so Khmer students in Paris belonged, into an organization for nationalist and leftist ideas. Inside the KSA and its successor organizations was a secret organization known as the Cercle Marxiste. The organization was composed of cells of three to six members with most members knowing nothing about the overall structure of the organization. In 1952 Pol Pot, Hou Yuon, Ieng Sary, and other leftists gained notoriety by sending an open letter to Sihanouk calling him the "strangler of infant democracy." A year later, the French authorities closed down the KSA. In 1956, however, Hou Yuon and Khieu Samphan helped to establish a new group, the Khmer Students' Union. Inside, the group was still run by the Cercle Marxiste.

The doctoral dissertations written by Hou Yuon and Khieu Samphan express basic themes that were later to become the cornerstones of the policy adopted by Democratic Kampuchea. The central role of the peasants in national development was espoused by Hou Yuon in his 1955 thesis, ''The Cambodian Peasants and Their Prospects for Modernization'', which challenged the conventional view that urbanization and industrialization are necessary precursors of development. The major argument in Khieu Samphan's 1959 thesis, ''Cambodia's Economy and Industrial Development'', was that the country had to become self-reliant and end its economic dependency on the developed world. In its general contours, Khieu's work reflected the influence of a branch of the "dependency theory" school, which blamed lack of development in the Third World on the economic domination of the industrialized nations.

==Path to power==
===KPRP Second Congress===
After returning to Cambodia in 1953, Pol Pot threw himself into party work. At first he went to join with forces allied to the Viet Minh operating in the rural areas of Kampong Cham Province (Kompong Cham). After the end of the war, he moved to Phnom Penh under Tou Samouth's "urban committee" where he became an important point of contact between above-ground parties of the left and the underground secret communist movement. His comrades, Ieng Sary and Hou Yuon, became teachers at a new private high school, the Lycée Kambuboth, which Hou Yuon helped to establish. Khieu Samphan returned from Paris in 1959, taught as a member of the law faculty of the University of Phnom Penh, and started a left-wing, French-language publication, ''L'Observateur''. The paper soon acquired a reputation in Phnom Penh's small academic circle. The following year, the government closed the paper, and Sihanouk's police publicly humiliated Khieu by beating, undressing and photographing him in public--as Shawcross notes, "not the sort of humiliation that men forgive or forget." Yet the experience did not prevent Khieu from advocating cooperation with Sihanouk in order to promote a united front against United States activities in South Vietnam. As mentioned, Khieu Samphan, Hou Yuon, and Hu Nim were forced to "work through the system" by joining the Sangkum and by accepting posts in the prince's government. 

In late September, 1960, twenty-one leaders of the KPRP held a secret congress in a vacant room of the Phnom Penh railroad station. This pivotal event remains shrouded in mystery because its outcome has become an object of contention (and considerable historical rewriting) between pro-Vietnamese and anti-Vietnamese Khmer communist factions. The question of cooperation with, or resistance to, Sihanouk was thoroughly discussed. Tou Samouth, who advocated a policy of cooperation, was elected general secretary of the KPRP that was renamed the Workers' Party of Kampuchea (WPK). His ally, Nuon Chea (also known as Long Reth), became deputy general secretary; however, Pol Pot and Ieng Sary were named to the Political Bureau to occupy the third and the fifth highest positions in the renamed party's hierarchy. The name change is significant. By calling itself a workers' party, the Cambodian movement claimed equal status with the Vietnam Workers' Party. The pro-Vietnamese regime of the People's Republic of Kampuchea (PRK) implied in the 1980s that the September 1960 meeting was nothing more than the second congress of the KPRP. 

On July 20, 1962, Tou Samouth was murdered by the Cambodian government. In February 1963, at the WPK's second congress, Pol Pot was chosen to succeed Tou Samouth as the party's general secretary. Tou's allies, Nuon Chea and Keo Meas, were removed from the Central Committee and replaced by Son Sen and Vorn Vet. From then on, Pol Pot and loyal comrades from his Paris student days controlled the party center, edging out older veterans whom they considered excessively pro-Vietnamese. 

In July 1963, Pol Pot and most of the central committee left Phnom Penh to establish an insurgent base in Ratanakiri Province in the northeast. Pol Pot had shortly before been put on a list of thirty four leftists who were summoned by Sihanouk to join the government and sign statements saying Sihanouk was the only possible leader for the country. Pol Pot and Chou Chet were the only people on the list who escaped. All the others agreed to cooperate with the government and were afterward under 24-hour watch by the police.

===From enemy to ally: Sihanouk and the GRUNK===
The region Pol Pot and the others moved to was inhabited by tribal minorities, the Khmer Loeu, whose rough treatment (including resettlement and forced assimilation) at the hands of the central government made them willing recruits for a guerrilla struggle. In 1965, Pol Pot made a visit of several months to North Vietnam and China. He probably received some training in China, which must have enhanced his prestige when he returned to the WPK's liberated areas. Despite friendly relations between Norodom Sihanouk and the Chinese, the latter kept Pol Pot's visit a secret from Sihanouk. In September 1966, the party changed its name to the Communist Party of Kampuchea (CPK). The change in the name of the party was a closely guarded secret. Lower ranking members of the party and even the Vietnamese were not told of it and neither was the membership until many years later. The party leadership endorsed armed struggle against the government, then led by Sihanouk. In 1967, several small-scale attempts at insurgency were made by the CPK but they had little success. 

In 1968, the Khmer Rouge forces launched a national insurgency across Cambodia (see also Cambodian Civil War). Though North Vietnam had not been informed of the decision, its forces provided shelter and weapons to the Khmer Rouge after the insurgency started. Vietnamese support for the insurgency made it impossible for the Cambodian military to effectively counter it. For the next two years the insurgency grew as Sihanouk did very little to stop it. As the insurgency grew stronger, the party finally openly declared itself to be the Communist Party of Kampuchea (CPK).

The political appeal of the Khmer Rouge was increased as a result of the situation created by the removal of Sihanouk as head of state in 1970. Premier Lon Nol, with the support of the National Assembly, deposed Sihanouk. Sihanouk, in exile in Beijing, made an alliance with the Khmer Rouge and became the nominal head of a Khmer Rouge-dominated government-in-exile (known by its French acronym, GRUNK) backed by the People's Republic of China. Sihanouk's popular support in rural Cambodia allowed the Khmer Rouge to extend its power and influence to the point that by 1973 it exercised ''de facto'' control over the majority of Cambodian territory, although only a minority of its population. Many people in Cambodia who helped the Khmer Rouge against the Lon Nol government thought they were fighting for the restoration of Sihanouk.

The relation between the massive carpet bombing of Cambodia by the United States and the growth of the Khmer Rouge, in terms of recruitment and popular support, has been a matter of interest to historians. In 1984 Craig Etcheson of the Documentation Center of Cambodia argued that it is "untenable" to assert that the Khmer Rouge would not have won but for U.S. intervention and that while the bombing did help Khmer Rouge recruitment, they "would have won anyway." <ref>Etcheson, Craig, ''The Rise and Demise of Democratic Kampuchea'', Westview Press, 1984, p. 97</ref> However, more recently historians have cited the U.S. intervention and bombing campaign (spanning 1965-1973) as a significant factor leading to increased support of the Khmer Rouge among the Cambodian peasantry. Historian Ben Kiernan and Taylor Owen have used a combination of sophisticated satellite mapping, recently unclassified data about the extent of bombing activities, and peasant testimony, to argue that there was a strong correlation between villages targeted by U.S. bombing and recruitment of peasants by the Khmer Rouge. Kiernan and Owen argue that "Civilian casualties in Cambodia drove an enraged populace into the arms of an insurgency that had enjoyed relatively little support until the bombing began." <ref>http://www.yale.edu/cgp/Walrus_CambodiaBombing_OCT06.pdf</ref> In his 1996 study of Pol Pot's rise to power, Kiernan argued that "Pol Pot's revolution would not have won power without U.S. economic and military destabilisation of Cambodia" and that the U.S. carpet bombing "was probably the most significant factor in Pol Pot's rise." <ref>Kiernan, Ben, The Pol Pot Regime,1996, Yale University Press, p. 16</ref>

When the U.S. Congress suspended aid to Cambodia in 1973, the Khmer Rouge made sweeping gains in the country. By 1975, with the Lon Nol government running out of ammunition, it was clear that it was only a matter of time before the government would collapse. On April 17, 1975 the Khmer Rouge captured Phnom Penh.

==The Khmer Rouge in power==

<!-- Deleted image removed: thumb|300px|Some of the Khmer Rouge leaders during their period in power. [[Pol Pot is on the left. (Photo on display at the Tuol Sleng Genocide Museum]] -->
The leadership of the Khmer Rouge remained largely unchanged from the 1960s to the mid-1990s. The leaders were mostly from middle-class families and had been educated at French universities.

The Standing Committee of the Khmer Rouge's Central Committee ("Party Center") during its period of power consisted of:
*Pol Pot (Saloth Sar) "Brother number 1" the effective leader of the movement, General Secretary from 1963 until his death in 1998
*Nuon Chea (Long Bunruot) "Brother number 2" Prime Minister (alive, arrested in 2007 <ref>[http://www.bangkokpost.com/breaking_news/breakingnews.php?id=121821 Bangkok Post, "Former Khmer Rouge leader arrested", September 2007]</ref>)
*Ieng Sary "Brother number 3" Deputy Prime Minister (Pol Pot's brother-in-law) (alive, arrested in 2007)
*Ta Mok (Chhit Chhoeun) "Brother number 4" Final Khmer Rouge leader, Southwest Regional Secretary (died in custody awaiting trial for genocide, July 21, 2006)
*Khieu Samphan "Brother number 5" President of the Khmer Rouge (alive, arrested in 2007)
*Son Sen Defense Minister (d. 1997)
*Yun Yat (d. 1997)
*Ke Pauk "Brother number 13" Former secretary of the Northern zone (d. 2002) 
*Ieng Thirith (alive, arrested in 2007)

In power, the Khmer Rouge carried out a radical program that included isolating the country from foreign influence, closing schools, hospitals and factories, abolishing banking, finance and currency, outlawing all religions, confiscating all private property and relocating people from urban areas to collective farms where forced labor was widespread. The purpose of this policy was to turn Cambodians into "Old People" through agricultural labor. These actions resulted in massive deaths through executions, work exhaustion, illness, and starvation.

In Phnom Penh and other cities, the Khmer Rouge told residents that they would be moved only about "two or three kilometers" outside the city and would return in "two or three days." Some witnesses say they were told that the evacuation was because of the "threat of American bombing" and that they did not have to lock their houses since the Khmer Rouge would "take care of everything" until they returned. These were not the first evacuations of civilian populations by the Khmer Rouge. Similar evacuations of populations without possessions had been occurring on a smaller scale since the early 1970s.

The Khmer Rouge attempted to turn Cambodia into a classless society by depopulating cities and forcing the urban population ("New People") into agricultural communes. The entire population was forced to become farmers in labor camps. During their four years in power, the Khmer Rouge overworked and starved the population, at the same time executing selected groups who had the potential to undermine the new state (including intellectuals or even those that had stereotypical signs of learning, such as glasses) and killing many others for even minor breaches of rules.

Cambodians were expected to produce three tons of rice per hectare; before the Khmer Rouge era, the average was only one ton per hectare. The Khmer Rouge forced people to work for 12 hours non-stop, without adequate rest or food. They did not believe in western medicine but instead favoured traditional peasant medicine; many died as a result.  Family relationships not sanctioned by the state were also banned, and family members could be put to death for communicating with each other. In any case, family members were often relocated to different parts of the country with all postal and telephone services abolished. The total lack of agricultural knowledge by the former city dwellers made famine inevitable. Rural dwellers were often unsympathetic or too frightened to assist them. Such acts as picking wild fruit or berries was seen as "private enterprise" for which the death penalty applied.

thumb|Flagge der ''Roten Khmer''
Die '''Roten Khmer''' (franz. Khmers rouges) waren eine Guerillatruppe, die 1975 in Kambodscha an die Macht kam und durch besondere Grausamkeit weltweite Bekanntheit erlangte. Sie selbst stellten sich als Kommunisten, zeitweise auch als Maoisten dar. Ihr Name leitet sich vom kambodschanischen Staatsvolk, den Khmer, ab.

== Ursprünge ==

Die Roten Khmer hatten ihren Ursprung in der Kommunistischen Partei Kambodschas (Angkar), die 1951 aus der indochinesischen KP entstand. Die Unterdrückung der kambodschanischen Kommunisten durch König Norodom Sihanouk und danach General Lon Nol veranlasste viele der Parteimitglieder und -anhänger zur Flucht nach Nordvietnam, während eine sich aus der Bauernschaft rekrutierende Fraktion mit Hang zum Nationalismus, zu der auch der Student Pol Pot und andere spätere Khmer-Führer zählen, zurückblieb und im Untergrund den Kampf aufnahm. 

Der Armeegeneral Lon Nol kam am 18. März 1970 – während eines Auslandsaufenthaltes von Staatschef Prinz Sihanouk – durch einen von den USA unterstützten Putsch an die Macht und erhielt von den USA umfangreiche Wirtschafts- und Militärhilfe.

Die FNL (Viet Cong) unterstützte die kleine Gruppe der kommunistischen Khmer-Partisanen. Die Gruppe hatte sich mehrfach umbenannt, weshalb König Sihanouk gegenüber der Presse den zusammenfassenden Begriff „Rote Khmer“ verwendete, der sich dann im Ausland durchsetzte; selber hatten sich die Roten Khmer nie so bezeichnet. Die FNL nutzte den östlichen Teil des kambodschanischen Territoriums als Transportweg (Ho-Chi-Minh-Pfad) und Rückzugsgebiet.

Mit Lon Nols Billigung versuchten B-52-Flugzeugen wurden von 1968 bis 1973 mehr als 700.000 Tonnen Bomben und alleine 1973 doppelt soviele Bomben über Kambodscha abgeworfen wie über Japan während des gesamten Zweiten Weltkrieges. Dass Vietnamesen und Amerikaner ihren Krieg nach Kambodscha trugen, erklärt den nationalistischen und hasserfüllten Kurs der Roten Khmer somit zu einem gewissen Teil. Der kambodschanische Nationalismus hat seinen Ursprung jedoch nicht erst in den 1970er-Jahren, sondern in den Auseinandersetzungen mit den benachbarten Vietnamesen (vgl. Thai (vgl. Sukhothai, Ayutthaya) nach dem Niedergang des historischen Reiches von Angkor, der jahrhundertelangen teilweisen Fremdherrschaft und schließlich der Einverleibung Kambodschas in das französische Kolonialreich (''Französisch-Indochina'').

Sihanouk selbst floh in die Volksrepublik China und arrangierte sich dort, von den Chinesen dazu gedrängt, mit den Roten Khmer, so dass er einer Exilregierung unter deren Beteiligung vorstand. Diese eroberten in den nächsten Jahren weite Teile Kambodschas, so dass die Lon-Nol-Regierung zuletzt nur noch Phnom Penh unter ihrer Kontrolle hatte.

== Herrschaft der Roten Khmer ==

Am 17. April 1975 wurde Phnom Penh von den Roten Khmer eingenommen, das „Demokratische Kampuchea“ ausgerufen und der im Exil lebende Norodom Sihanouk als Staatsoberhaupt eingesetzt. 

Die meisten Einwohner der Stadt freuten sich über das Ende der Kämpfe und begrüßten die einmarschierenden Truppen jubelnd. Ein großer Teil der Kämpfer bestand aus Kindersoldaten, die zu diesem Zeitpunkt nichts anderes als die Schrecken des Krieges kannten.

Die Stimmungslage kippte jedoch schnell, als Pol Pot und die Roten Khmer mit der Errichtung eines Terrorregimes begannen. Am 4. April 1976 wurde Norodom Sihanouk wegen seiner Kritik am Kurs der Roten Khmer als Staatsoberhaupt abgesetzt und unter Hausarrest gestellt, Khieu Samphan zum neuen Staatsoberhaupt und Pol Pot als Regierungschef ernannt.

=== Geheimhaltung ===

Eine Eigenheit der kommunistischen Herrschaft in Kambodscha, die sie von den anderen kommunistischen Diktaturen unterscheidet, war die völlige Geheimhaltung von Partei und führenden Funktionären. Sie verbargen sich hinter einer vorgeblichen Organisation mit der Bezeichnung Angkar. Den ersten öffentlichen Auftritt absolvierte Pol Pot erst rund ein Jahr nach der Machtübernahme im März 1976 als „Arbeiter einer Kautschukplantage“. Pol Pot ließ keine Biographie von sich veröffentlichen, es gab keine Textsammlungen von ihm; es wurden weder Skulpturen noch offizielle Portraits angefertigt. Es gibt nur wenige Fotos von ihm. Viele Kambodschaner erfuhren erst nach seinem Sturz von der Identität ihres Regierungschefs.

=== Ideologie und Wirklichkeit ===

Den kommunistischen Ideen hing Pol Pot schon als junger Mann an und trat mit 18 in die KP Kambodschas ein und wenig später, als Student in Paris, in die KP Frankreichs. Seinen Vorstellungen zufolge war neben der Korruption des Lon-Nol-Regimes gerade im Unterschied von Stadt und Land die Ursachen für die Armut Kambodschas zu sehen. Also glaubte er, das Bauerntum stärken und alles Städtische zerstören zu müssen.

Die sofortige Deportation der Stadtbevölkerung auf die Reisfelder des Landes verwandelte das zuvor über 2 Millionen Einwohner zählende Phnom Penh binnen weniger Tage in eine Geisterstadt, ebenso wurden die Provinzhauptstädte entvölkert. Auf diesem „langen Marsch“, der bis zu einem Monat dauerte, starben tausende Menschen (insbesondere Ältere und Kinder) aufgrund der Strapazen. 

Bald war jeder Überlebende zum Arbeiter gewandelt und gezwungen, eine schwarze Einheitskleidung zu tragen, die jede Individualität beseitigen sollte. Die Sprecher der Roten Khmer verkündeten allerdings den Beginn eines neuen revolutionären Zeitalters, in dem jede Form der Unterdrückung und der Gewaltherrschaft abgeschafft sei.

In den ersten Monaten dieser revolutionären Ära verwandelte sich das Land in ein gigantisches Arbeits- und Gefangenenlager. Tagesarbeitszeiten von 12 Stunden oder mehr waren keine Seltenheit, und jeder Schritt der Arbeiter wurde so überwacht, dass fast jeder um sein Leben fürchten musste. So konnte auch, wer zu spät zur Arbeit kam, wegen des Verdachts auf Sabotage hingerichtet werden.

Geld wurde abgeschafft, Bücher wurden verbrannt, Lehrer, Händler und beinahe die gesamte intellektuelle Elite des Landes wurde ermordet, um den Agrarkommunismus, wie er Pol Pot vorschwebte, zu verwirklichen. Die beabsichtigte Verlagerung der Wirtschaftstätigkeit aufs Land bedingte deren vollständiges Erliegen, da auch Industrie- und Dienstleistungsbetriebe – Banken, Krankenhäuser, Schulen – geschlossen wurden. 

1976 stellte Pol Pot einen 4-Jahres-Plan auf, der alle Klassenunterschiede beseitigen und das Land in eine „blühende kommunistische Zukunft“ führen sollte. Die landwirtschaftliche Produktivität Kambodschas sollte verdreifacht werden, um durch Nahrungsexporte die benötigten Devisen zu erhalten. Doch dieses Ziel wurde nicht erreicht, da die wirtschaftliche Infrastruktur größtenteils zerstört war und die Landarbeiter zu einem großen Teil ohne Arbeitsgeräte dastanden.

Die Versorgung mit Nahrung brach auch durch Fehlplanung und Misswirtschaft zusammen. Da lokale Führungskräfte Repressalien befürchteten, fälschten sie die Ernteberichte. Der Ertrag wurde dennoch abgeführt. Nahrungsmangel und Zwangsarbeit sowie fehlende medizinische Versorgung führten zum Tod Hunderttausender. Viele der verantwortlichen Führungskräfte wurden wegen Sabotage des 4-Jahres-Plans inhaftiert und kamen ums Leben.

=== „Massensäuberungen“ ===
thumb|Schädel von Opfern der ''Roten Khmer''
Gleichzeitig wurden so genannte Massensäuberungen durchgeführt. Wer im Verdacht stand, mit Ausländern zu kollaborieren, wurde getötet. Nicht nur Pol Pot und die Roten Khmer machten Vietnamesen und andere Ausländer für die Notlage Kambodschas verantwortlich. Die Vietnamesen waren nicht nur unbeliebt, weil sie den Krieg mit nach Kambodscha getragen hatten, sondern auch weil sie – von den Franzosen zur Zeit des kolonialen Französisch-Indochina für Verwaltungsaufgaben ins Land geholt – für viele ein Symbol für die Fremdbestimmung des Landes darstellten.

Die „Stalins Herrschaft wurden auch unter der Diktatur der Roten Khmer massenhaft Oppositionelle wie Monarchisten und Anhänger des Lon-Nol-Regimes getötet, aber auch jene Kommunisten, welche kurz vor der Machtübernahme aus Vietnam nach Kambodscha zurückgekehrt waren. 

thumb|Tafel in der Gedenkstätte Tuol Sleng mit den für die Gefangenen des Lagers verbindlichen Regeln.
Während der vierjährigen Schreckensherrschaft wurden schätzungsweise 1,7 bis 2 Millionen Menschen in Todeslagern umgebracht oder kamen bei der Zwangsarbeit auf den Reisfeldern ums Leben (bei einer Gesamtbevölkerung von etwas mehr als 7 Millionen). Im berüchtigten „Sicherheitsgefängnis 21“ in Phnom Penh, das unter der Leitung des unter seinem Pseudonym „Dëuch“ bekannten Kang Kek Leu stand, überlebten 7 von insgesamt 15.000 bis 30.000 Gefangenen. Wer dort nicht an der Folter starb, wurde auf den Killing Fields vor den Toren der Stadt umgebracht.

Die Massensäuberung wird von Experten auch als Autogenozid bezeichnet, da das kambodschanische Volk sich beinahe selbst umbrachte.
<ref>[http://www.zeit.de/2007/26/Kommentar-Rote-Khmer Susanne Mayer: ''Endlich! Die Prozesse gegen die Khmer Rouge in Kambodscha können beginnen''; in Die Zeit, Ausgabe vom 21. Juni 2007]</ref>

Berichte über die Gräueltaten der Roten Khmer sorgten bis zu ihrer Absetzung für Diskussionen zwischen Linken und Rechten. Die Berichte von John Barron und Anthony Paul sowie Pater François Ponchaud, der als erster in seinem 1977 erschienen Buch ''Cambodge – année zéro'' über Massenmorde in Kambodscha schrieb, wurden von westlichen Linken wie dem Medienkritiker The Nation am 6. Juni 1977. Allerdings verwahrte sich Chomsky gegen die Vorwürfe, seine damalige Kritik käme einer Relativierung der Schreckensherrschaft der Roten Khmer gleich. Zu sehen sei seine Kritik vielmehr als Widerlegung der Darstellung Kambodschas als eines „sanftmütigen Landes“, das 1975 durch die Roten Khmer plötzlich in den Abgrund gestoßen wurde. <ref>[http://www.chomsky.info/articles/19770625.htm Noam Chomsky, Edward S. Herman: ''Distortions at Fourth Hand''; in: The Nation, Ausgabe vom 6. Juni 1977]</ref>

===Opferzahlen===
Insgesamt wurde bis heute etliche Massengräber überall im Land entdeckt, ausgegraben und ausgewertet, mit einer totalen Anzahl von ca. 1,39 Millionen Leichnamen. Diverse Studien differieren in ihrer Einschätzung der Gesamtopferzahlen zwischen 740.000 und 3.000.000. Die meisten jedoch bewegen sich zwischen 1,4 Millionen und 2,2 Millionen, wobei als Todesursache zur einen Hälfte Exekutionen und zur anderen, Tod durch Nahrungsmangel und Krankheiten angenommen wird. <ref name="Mekong.net_deaths">{{cite web
  | last = Sharp
  | first = Bruce 
  | title = Counting Hell: The Death Toll of the Khmer Rouge Regime in Cambodia
  |date= 2005-04-01
  | url = http://www.mekong.net/cambodia/deaths.htm
  | accessdate = 2006-07-05 }}</ref>

== Entmachtung ==