thumb|right|''Wassily Kandinsky''. Afkomstig uit Kandinsky's ''Rückblicke''. 1913.
'''Wassily Kandinsky''' (&#1042;&#1072;&#1089;&#1080;&#1083;&#1080;&#1081; &#1042;&#1072;&#1089;&#1080;&#1083;&#1100;&#1077;&#1074;&#1080;&#1095; &#1050;&#1072;&#1085;&#1076;&#1080;&#1085;&#1089;&#1082;&#1080;&#1081;, Nederlandse transliteratie: Vasili Vasiljevitsj Kandinski) (Moskou, 4 december 1866 &ndash; Neuilly-sur-Seine, 13 december 1944) was een Russisch-Franse kunstschilder en graficus. 

==Biografie==
Kandinsky was aanvankelijk als jurist verbonden aan de Universiteit van Moskou. In 1896 vertrok hij naar München in Duitsland. Daar studeerde hij eerst twee jaar aan de Anton-Azbé-school en daarna aan de Akademie der Bildenden Künste. Kandinsky was één van de grondleggers van de kunstenaarsgroep de Phalanx en richtte na een jaar de Phalanx-Malschule op. Een van de leerlingen, Gabriele Münter, werd zijn levensgezellin. 

In 1909 stichtte hij met zijn vriend Alexej Javlenski de Neue Künstlergemeinschaft München. Na een jaar verliet hij de groep echter en richtte in 1911 met Franz Marc de kunstenaarsvereniging Der Blaue Reiter op, genoemd naar een eerder ruiter-schilderij van Kandinsky en naar de voorliefde voor paarden van Franz Marc; van de kleur blauw hielden ze allebei. Der Blaue Reiter werd ook de naam van de door deze groep uitgegeven almanak. In 1912 verscheen in twee opeenvolgende edities zijn belangrijke essay ''Über das Geistige in der Kunst''.

In Murnau, waar hij met zijn gezellin in 1910 verbleef, zou hij het abstracte schilderen ontdekt hebben, naar aanleiding van één van zijn omgekeerde figuratieve werken. "...Ik bevond me onverwacht voor een schilderij van een onbeschrijfelijk overweldigende schoonheid. Verbaasd bleef ik staan, gefascineerd door dit werk ... Het schilderij had geen onderwerp, het stelde geen enkel herkenbaar object voor, het was uitsluitend samengesteld uit lichtende kleurvlekken ..." verklaarde hij. In Murnau was de invloed van de Fauvisten op zijn werk duidelijk. In 1905 hadden zij voor het eerst als groep tentoongesteld op het Salon d'Automne in Parijs, waar ook Kandinsky aan deelgenomen had. Een voorbeeld van deze invloed is het schilderij "Murnau Kohlgruberstrasse" uit 1908.

De meningen omtrent het ontstaan van de abstracte kunst lopen wel enigszins uit elkaar. Waren het de "Disques simultanés" van de Franse Kupka, of de geometrische oefeningen van Cézanne zijn "Sainte Victoire" al vanaf 1885 en Monet zijn "Nymphéas" vanaf 1890 louter tot kleur aan het abstraheren waren. Zeker is dat de toen 20-jarige student Kandinsky al in 1886 de kleurenoverheersing in de oude Russische iconen had opgemerkt en dat hij, 9 jaar later, op een expositie in Moskou, in bewondering stond voor het schilderij de "Korenschelf" van Claude Monet, waarbij hij zich afvroeg "...Waarom zou de emancipatie van de kleur niet kunnen samengaan met de bevrijding van de vorm?...". 

Kandinsky liet zich inspireren door muziek en met name de atonale muziek van Arnold Schönberg. In ''Über das Geistige in der Kunst'' stelde Kandinsky dat kleur en klank psychologische effecten hebben op de menselijke ziel. Hij stelde een klankkleurtheorie op, die een grote invloed heeft gehad op de ontwikkeling van de twintigste-eeuwse kunst. Volgens Kandinsky spreekt iedere kleur een eigen taal met een eigen expressie en zit in elke kleur en vorm een ziel. Verschillende kleuren samen zullen een innerlijke beleving bij de beschouwer bewerkstelligen. Ook de verschillende klanken in muziek, die samen een harmonieus geheel vormen, zullen een innerlijke beleving bij de luisteraar opwekken. Deze krachtige uitwerking die kleur en klank hebben op de menselijke psyche, noemt hij ‘innerlijke klank’ of ‘seelische Vibration’.

Bij het uitbreken van de Eerste Wereldoorlog keerde Kandinsky terug naar Moskou. Hij werd er leraar en trouwde er in 1917 met Nina de Andrejevski. Zijn bruid was 16, hij was 50. Zijn vriendin Gabriele was in Murnau gebleven. Ze zou er sterven in 1962. Na de oorlog keerde hij terug naar Duitsland en in 1922 werd hij professor aan het Bauhaus van Weimar, waaraan Paul Klee al verbonden was. Hier begon de meest productieve periode uit Kandinsky's leven. Hij noemde het zelf "de tijd, gekarakteriseerd door een lyrisch geometrisme". Toen het Bauhaus in 1925 verhuisde naar Dessau, oefende hij er dezelfde functie uit. Nog in 1922 realiseerde hij voor de Jurifreie Kunstausstellung van Berlijn een monumentaal decor over de 4 muren van het Salon. Dit kunstwerk werd gereconstrueerd in het Nationaal Museum voor Moderne Kunst (M.N.A.M.) van Parijs, in 1977. 

In 1924 stichtte hij met Lyonel Feininger, Paul Klee en Alexej von Javlenski weer een andere kunstenaarsgroep, "Die Blauen Vier". 

In 1928 verkreeg Kandinsky de Duitse nationaliteit, maar in 1933 moest hij Duitsland verlaten, net als Paul Klee. Het Bauhaus, dat het jaar ervoor overgeplaatst was naar Berlijn, werd datzelfde jaar door de Gestapo gesloten. Hij kwam naar Parijs, waar hij de Franse nationaliteit aannam en ging met Nina in Neuilly-sur-Seine wonen. Hij schilderde er in 1944 zijn laatste stuk "Getemperd élan" en stierf er op 13 december 1944. Hij stierf aan de gevolgen van atherosclerose, een vaatziekte.

Zijn weduwe Nina overleefde hem bijna 40 jaar. Ze werd vermoord gevonden tijdens een vakantie in haar chalet te Gstaad, in Zwitserland, in september 1980. Hij was een neef van filosoof en psychiater Viktor Kandinski.

==Werk==
===Publicaties===
''Der Blaue Reiter''  was ook de naam voor een door de groep uitgegeven almanak, ontstaan naar een gelijknamig schilderij van Kandinsky. Een jaar later verscheen in twee opeenvolgende edities zijn belangrijke essay ''Über das Geistige in der Kunst''.

Naast talloze van zijn theoretische beschouwingen, die in de "Bauhaus-Bücher" verschijnen, maakte hij ook werk van zijn "Punkt und Linie zu Fläche", gepubliceerd in 1926. 

{{Infobox Artist
| name          = Wassily Kandinsky
| image         = Vassily-kandinsky.jpeg
| imagesize     = 200px
| birthname     = Wassily Kandinsky
| birthdate     = December 16, 1866
| location      = Moscow
| deathdate     = 
| deathplace    = Neuilly-sur-Seine
| nationality   = Russian
| field         = Painting
| training      = Academy of Fine Arts, Munich
| movement      = Expressionism; abstract art
| works         = ''On White II'', ''Der Blaue Reiter''
}}

'''Wassily Kandinsky''' (Russian: Василий Кандинский, first name pronounced as [vassi:li]) ( – painter, abstract works. 

Born in University of Dorpat—he started painting studies (life-drawing, sketching and anatomy) at the age of 30. 

In 1896 he settled in Nazis closed it in 1933. He then moved to France where he lived the rest of his life, and became a French citizen in 1939.  He died at Neuilly-sur-Seine in 1944.

== Artistic periods ==
left|thumb|An early period work "Munich-Schwabing with the Church of St. Ursula" (Kandinsky 1908)
Kandinsky's creation of purely abstract work followed a long period of development and maturation of intense theoretical thought based on his personal artistic experiences. He called this devotion to inner beauty, fervor of spirit, and deep spiritual desire ''inner necessity'', which was a central aspect of his art.

Kandinsky learned from a variety of sources during his youth and life in Moscow. Later in his life, he would recall being fascinated and unusually stimulated by color as a child. The fascination with color symbolism and psychology continued as he grew, although he seems to have made no attempt to study art. In 1889 he was part of an ethnographic research group that travelled to the Vologda region north of Moscow. In ''Looks on the Past'' he relates that the houses and churches were decorated with such shimmering colors that, upon entering them, he had the impression that he was moving into a painting.  The experience and his study of the folk art in the region, in particular the use of bright colors on a dark background, was reflected in much his early work.  A few years later, he first related the act of painting to creating music in the manner for which he would later become noted and wrote, "Color is the keyboard, the eyes are the hammer, the soul is the piano with the strings."

It was not until 1896, at the age of 30, that Kandinsky gave up a promising career teaching law and economics to enroll in art school in Munich. He was not immediately granted admission in Munich and began learning art on his own. Also in 1896, prior to leaving Moscow, he saw an exhibit of paintings by Monet and was particularly taken with the famous impressionistic ''Haystacks'' which, to him, had a powerful sense of color almost independent of the objects themselves. Later he would write about this experience:

He was similarly influenced during this period by Lohengrin which, he felt, pushed the limits of music and melody beyond standard lyricism.

Kandinsky was also spiritually influenced by H. P. Blavatsky (1831–1891), the most important exponent of Theosophy in modern times. Theosophical theory postulates that creation is a geometrical progression, beginning with a single point. The creative aspect of the forms is expressed by the descending series of circles, triangles, and squares. 
Kandinsky's book ''Concerning the Spiritual In Art'' (1910) and ''Point and Line to Plane'' (1926) echoed this basic Theosophical tenet.

=== Artistic metamorphosis (1896–1911) ===
thumb|right|220px|Kandinsky's ''Der Blaue Reiter'' (1903).
Kandinsky's time at art school, typically considered difficult to get through, was eased by the fact that he was older and more settled than the other students.  It was during this time that he began to emerge as a true art theorist in addition to being a painter. Unfortunately, very little exists of his work from this period, though it is supposed to have been extensive. The survival of his works changes at the beginning of the 20<sup>th</sup> century and much remains of the many landscapes and towns that he painted, using broad swathes of color but recognizable forms. For the most part, however, Kandinsky's paintings did not emphasize any human figures. An exception is ''Sunday, Old Russia'' (1904) where Kandinsky recreates a highly colorful (and no doubt fanciful) view of peasants and nobles before the walls of a town. ''Riding Couple'' (1907) depicts a man on horseback, holding a woman with tenderness and care as they ride past a Russian town with luminous walls across a river. Yet the horse is muted, while the leaves in the trees, the town, and the reflections in the river glisten with spots of color and brightness. The work shows the influence of pointilism and works to blend back-, middle-, and foreground into a luminescent surface.  Fauvism is also apparent in these early works.  Colors are used to express the artist's experience of subject-matter—not to describe objective nature.

Perhaps the most important of Kandinsky's paintings from the decade of the 1900s was ''The Blue Rider'' (1903) which shows a small cloaked figure on a speeding horse rushing through a rocky meadow. The rider's cloak is a medium blue, and the shadow cast is a darker blue. In the foreground are more amorphous blue shadows, presumably the counterparts of the fall trees in the background. The Blue Rider in the painting is prominent, but not clearly defined, and the horse has an unnatural gait (which Kandinsky must have known). Indeed, some believe that a second figure, a child perhaps, is being held by the rider (though this could just as easily be another shadow from a solitary rider).  This type of intentional disjunction allowing viewers to participate in the creation of the artwork would become an increasingly conscious technique used by the artist in subsequent years—culminating in his great "abstract expressionist" works of the 1911–1914.  In ''The Blue Rider'' Kandinsky shows the rider more as a series of colors than of specific details. In and of itself, ''The Blue Rider'' is not exceptional in that regard when compared to contemporary painters, but it does show the direction that Kandinsky would take only a few years later.

From 1906 to 1908 Kandinsky spent a great deal of time travelling across Blue Rose symbolist group of Moscow) until he came to live in the small Murnau. ''The Blue Mountain'' (1908–1909) was painted at this time and shows more of  his trend towards pure abstraction. A mountain of blue is flanked by two broad trees, one yellow, and one red. A procession of some sort with three riders and several others crosses at the bottom. The faces, clothing, and saddles of the riders are each a single color, and neither they nor the walking figures display any real detail. The broad use of color in ''The Blue Mountain'', illustrate Kandinsky's move towards art in which the color itself is presented independently of form.
350px|thumb|In his own words, "Composition VII" was the most complex piece he ever painted (Kandinsky 1913)

=== The Blue Rider (1911–1914) ===
:''See also Der Blaue Reiter''
The paintings of this period are composed of large and very expressive colored masses evaluated independently from forms and lines which serve no longer to delimit them but are superimposed and overlap in a very free way to form paintings of an extraordinary force.

The influence of music has been very important on the birth of abstract art, as it is abstract by nature—it does not try to represent the exterior world but rather to express in an immediate way the inner feelings of the human soul. Kandinsky sometimes used musical terms to designate his works; he called many of his most spontaneous paintings "improvisations", while he entitled more elaborated works "compositions".

In addition to painting Kandinsky developed his voice as an art theorist. In fact, Kandinsky's influence on the history of Western art stems perhaps more from his theoretical works than from his paintings.  He helped to found the Neue Künstlervereinigung München (New Artists' Association) and became its president in 1909. The group was unable to integrate the more radical approach of those like Kandinsky with more conventional ideas of art and the group dissolved in late 1911. Kandinsky then moved to form a new group The Blue Rider (Der Blaue Reiter) with like minded artists such as August Macke and Franz Marc. The group released an almanac, called ''The Blue Rider Almanac'', and held two exhibits. More of each were planned, but the outbreak of World War I in 1914 ended these plans and sent Kandinsky home to Russia via Switzerland and Sweden.

Kandinsky's writing in ''The Blue Rider Almanac'' and the treatise ''On the Spiritual In Art'', which was released at almost the same time, served as both a defense and promotion of abstract art, as well as an appraisal that all forms of art were equally capable of reaching a level of spirituality. He believed that color could be used in a painting as something autonomous and apart from a visual description of an object or other form.

=== Return to Russia (1914–1921) ===

Through the years 1918 to 1921, Kandinsky dealt with the cultural development politics of Russia and collaborated in the domains of art pedagogy and museum reforms. He devoted his time to artistic teaching with a program based on form and color analysis, as well as participating in the organization of the Institute of Artistic Culture in Moscow. He painted little during this period. In 1916 he met Nina Andreievskaia, who in the following year became his wife. In 1921 Kandinsky received the mission to go to Germany to attend the Bauhaus of Weimar, on the invitation of its founder, the architect Walter Gropius. The next year, the Soviets officially forbade all forms of abstract art, judging them as harmful for socialist ideals.

=== The Bauhaus (1922–1933) === 
left|thumb|"On White II" (Kandinsky 1923)
The Bauhaus was an innovative architecture and art school founded by Walter Gropius. Its objectives included the merging of plastic arts with applied arts, reflected in its teaching methods based on the theoretical and practical application of the plastic arts synthesis. Kandinsky taught the basic design class for beginners, the course on advanced theory as well as conducting painting classes and a workshop where he completed his color theory with new elements of form psychology. The development of his works on forms study, particularly on point and different forms of lines, lead to the publication of his second major theoretical book ''Point and Line to Plane'' in 1926.

Geometrical elements took on increasing importance in his teaching as well as in his painting, particularly circle, half-circle, the angle, straight lines and curves. This period was a period of intense production. The freedom of which is characterised in each of his works by the treatment of planes rich in colors and magnificent gradations as in the painting ''Yellow – red – blue'' (1925), where Kandinsky shows his distance from constructivism and suprematism movements whose influence was increasing at this time.

The large two meter width painting that is ''Yellow – red – blue'' (1925) consists of a number of main forms: a vertical yellow rectangle, a slightly inclined red cross and a large dark blue circle, while a multitude of straight black or sinuous lines, arcs of circles, monochromatic circles and scattering of colored checkerboards contribute to its delicate complexity. This simple visual identification of forms and of the main colored masses present on the canvas only corresponds to a first approach of the inner reality of the work whose right appreciation necessitates a much deeper observation—not only of forms and colors involved in the painting, but also of their relation, their absolute position and their relative disposition on the canvas, of their whole and reciprocal harmony.

Kandinsky was one of Klee, Feininger and von Jawlensky formed in 1923. They lectured and exhibited together in the USA in 1924.

In front of the hostility of the right political parties, the Bauhaus left Weimar and settled in Dessau from 1925. Following a fierce slander campaign from the Nazis, the Bauhaus closed at Dessau in 1932. The school pursued its activities in Berlin until its dissolution in July 1933. Kandinsky then left Germany and settled in Paris.

350px|thumb|Composition X, painted during WWII. (Kandinsky 1939)

=== The great synthesis (1934–1944) ===

In Paris he was quite isolated since abstract painting—particularly geometric abstract painting—was not recognized, the artistic fashions being mainly Impressionism and cubism. Kandinsky lived in a small apartment and created his work in a studio constructed in the living room. Biomorphic forms with supple and non-geometric outlines appear in his paintings; forms which suggest externally microscopic organisms but which always express the artist's inner life. He used original colour compositions which evoke Slavonic popular art and which are similar to precious watermark works. He also occasionally mixed sand with paint to give a granular texture to his paintings.

This period corresponds, in fact, to a vast synthesis of his previous work, of which he used all elements, even enriching them. In 1936 and 1939 he painted his two last major compositions; canvases particularly elaborate and slowly ripped that he hadn't produced for many years. ''Composition IX'' is a painting with highly contrasted powerful diagonals and whose central form give the impression of a human embryo in the womb. The small squares of colors and the colored bands seem to stand out against the black background of ''Composition X'', as stars' fragments or filaments, while enigmatic hieroglyphs with pastel tones cover the large maroon mass, which seems to float in the upper left corner of the canvas.

In Kandinsky’s works, some characteristics are obvious while certain touches are more discrete and veiled; that is to say they reveal themselves only progressively to those who make the effort to deepen their connection with his work. He intended his forms, which he subtly harmonized and placed, to resonate with the observer's own soul.

== Kandinsky's conception of art ==
=== The artist as prophet ===

Writing that "music is the ultimate teacher," Kandinsky embarked upon the first seven of his ten ''Compositions''. The first three survive only in black-and-white photographs taken by fellow artist and friend, Gabriele Münter. While studies, sketches, and improvisations exist (particularly of ''Composition II''), a Nazi raid on the Bauhaus in the 1930s resulted in the confiscation of Kandinsky's first three ''Compositions''. They were displayed in the State-sponsored exhibit "Degenerate Art" then destroyed along with works by Paul Klee, Franz Marc and other modern artists. 

Influenced by Orthodox Christian, Kandinsky drew upon the Jewish and Christian stories of Noah's Ark, Jonah and the whale, Christ's Anastasis and Resurrection, the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse in the Revelation, various Russian folk tales, and the common mythological experiences of death and rebirth. Never attempting to picture any one of these stories as a narrative, he used their veiled imagery as symbols of the archetypes of death / rebirth and destruction / creation he felt were imminent to the pre-World War I world. 

As he stated in ''Concerning the Spiritual In Art'' (see below), Kandinsky felt that an authentic artist creating art from "an internal necessity" inhabits the tip of an upward moving triangle. This progressing triangle is penetrating and proceeding into tomorrow. Accordingly, what was odd or inconceivable yesterday is commonplace today; what is ''avant garde'' (and only understood by the few) today is standard tomorrow. The modern artist/prophet stands lonely at the tip of this triangle making new discoveries and ushering in tomorrow's reality. Kandinsky had become aware of recent developments in sciences, as well as the advances of modern artists who had contributed to radically new ways of seeing and experiencing the world.

''Composition IV'' and subsequent paintings are primarily concerned with evoking a spiritual resonance in viewer and artist. As in his painting of the apocalypse by water (''Composition VI''), Kandinsky puts the viewer in the situation of experiencing these epic myths by translating them into contemporary terms along with requisite senses of desperation, flurry, urgency, and confusion. This spiritual communion of viewer-painting-artist/prophet is ineffable but may be described to the limits of words and images.

=== Artistic and spiritual theoretician ===