Tanımı.- 1982 Anayasasının 7’nci maddesi, “yasama yetkisi Türk Milleti adına Türkiye Büyük Millet Meclisinindir. Bu yetki devredilemez” demektedir. Ancak Anayasa, “yasama yetkisi”nin ne olduğunu tanımlamamaktadır. Bununla birlikte biz, 7'nci maddeden yola çıkarak, yasama yetkisinin en azından “Türkiye Büyük Millet Meclisine ait bir yetki” olduğunu söyleyebiliriz. “Türkiye Büyük Millet Meclisinin yetkileri” ise 1982 Anayasasının 87’nci maddesinde sayılmıştır. O halde yasama yetkisini, “Türkiye Büyük Millet Meclisine ait ve 1982 Anayasasının 87’nci maddesinde sayılan yetkilerdir” şeklinde tanımlayabiliriz.

Kapsamı.- Bu maddeye göre “yasama yetkisi”nin kapsamında  şu yetkilerin bulunduğu söylenebilir:

1.   Kanun koymak, değiştirmek ve kaldırmak.

2.   Bakanlar Kurulu ve bakanları denetlemek.

3.   Bakanlar Kuruluna belli konularda kanun hükmünde kararname çıkarma yetkisi vermek.

4.   Bütçe ve kesin hesap kanun tasarılarını görüşmek ve kabul etmek.

5.   Para basılmasına karar vermek.

6.   Savaş ilânına karar vermek.

'''Legislation''' (or "promulgated (or "bill, which is typically also known as "legislation" while it remains under active consideration.

In some jurisdictions legislation must not be confirmed by the executive branch of government before it enters into force as law.

Under the Westminster system, an item of legislation is known as an Act of Parliament after enactment.

Legislation is usually proposed by a member of the legislature (e.g. a member of Congress or Parliament), or by the executive, whereupon it is debated by members of the legislature and is often amended before passage. Most large legislatures enact only a small fraction of the bills proposed in a given session. Whether a given bill will be proposed and enter into force is generally a matter of the legislative priorities of government.

Those who have the formal power to ''create'' legislation are known as judicial branch of government may have the formal power to ''interpret'' legislation (see statutory interpretation).

== Alternate means of law-making ==

The act of making legislation is sometimes known as legislating. Under the doctrine of separation of powers, the law-making function is primarily the responsibility of the legislature. However, there are situations where legislation is enacted by other means (most commonly when constitutional law is enacted).  These other forms of law-making include referendums and constitutional conventions.  The term "legislation" is sometimes used to describe these situations, but other times, the term is used to distinguish acts of the legislature from these other lawmaking forms. 

The interpretation of law by the executive branch or the judiciary has been contended by some to be law-making, particularly when the judicial branch must address laws that appear to conflict (such as constitutional and statutory law). The extent to which the courts may be seen to "legislate" in this manner informs the ongoing contemporary debate concerning judicial activism (which may be contrasted with judicial restraint). Judicial law-making is not generally referred to as "legislation", however, except ironically. Also, some country's laws will empower the executive branch or other government agency to issue regulations or decrees which can carry the force of law, although this is also generally not considered legislation, per se.  Legislation can also be created at provincial and local levels of government (which have their own legislatures), where separation of powers may be less formal and complete. Legislation is a source of law which consist in the declaration of rule of the competent authority.