thumb|right|250px|Johnson in [[Rochester, New York in 1977]]
'''Alphonso Johnson''' (born 1951) is a American bassist who has been influential since the early 1970s.

==Biography==
Born in electric bass in his late teens. Beginning his career in the early 1970s, Johnson showed innovation and fluidity on the electric bass. He sessioned with a few jazz musicians before landing a job with Weather Report, taking over for co-founding member Miroslav Vitous.  Johnson, ranked alongside peers Stanley Clarke and Steve Swallow, was considered one of the best bassists of the period. His playing was featured on the Weather Report album ''Mysterious Traveller'', on the songs "Cucumber Slumber" and "Scarlet Woman". Johnson appeared on two more albums for Weather Report before he would leave the band to work with drummer Billy Cobham. 

Johnson was one of the first musicians to introduce the Genesis as the replacement for Steve Hackett who had quit Genesis in 1977. Johnson being more of a bassist than a guitarist, had recommended his friend ex-Sweetbottom guitarist and fellow sessions musician Daryl Stuermer, who would go on to remain a member of the Genesis's touring band for the rest of their existence.

In early 1982, Johnson joined Grateful Dead member Bob Weir's side project, Bobby and the Midnites.  He would reunite with Weir playing bass in place of Phil Lesh on The Other Ones 2000 tour.  He has performed fusion versions of Grateful Dead covers alongside Billy Cobham in the band Jazz Is Dead.

thumb|Alphonso Johnson, 1977
'''Alphonso Johnson''' (* US-amerikanischer Jazzbassist des Modern Jazz und Rockjazz. 

==Biographie==
Johnson begann auf der Posaune zu spielen und wechselte dann zum  elektrischen Bass. Sein Karriere als Profimusiker begann er in den frühen 1970er Jahren. Er arbeitete mit verschiedenen Jazzmusikern wie Chet Baker oder Woody Herman, bis er Mitglied der Jazzrock-Formation Weather Report wurde, an Stelle von Miroslav Vitous.  Johnsons Vorbilder sind Stanley Clarke und Steve Swallow. Er wirkte auf dem Weather Report Album ''Mysterious Traveller'' mit, bei den Titeln "Cucumber Slumber" und "Scarlet Woman". Johnson nahm noch zwei weitere Alben mit Weather Report auf, verließ dann die Band und arbeitete bei Billy Cobham, George Duke und den Crudaders. 
Danach bekam er für kurze Zeit den Job des Bassisten in der Rockband Genesis als Ersatz für Steve Hackett, der Genesis 1977 verließ.

==Auswahldiskographie==

Soloalben:
*Moonshadows (1976)
* Yesterdays Dreams (1976)