thumb|George Villiers, 1:e hertig av Buckingham, porträtterad av [[Rubens (1625).]]
'''George Villiers, 1:e hertig av Buckingham''', född engelsk statsman, hertig från 1623. Villiers hade ett enkelt ursprung men blev en maktfaktor i det tidiga 1600-talets England. Hertigen utövade ett stort inflytande på kung Jakob I och dennes son, den blivande kung Karl I. Efter en misslyckad friarresa, som syftade till att främja ett giftermål mellan Karl och den spanska prinsessan Maria Anna av Spanien, drev såväl Buckingham som Karl på Jakob I och förmådde denne till att helt bryta med Spanien. Buckinghams inflytande över kungarna ogillades av stora folklager, och han kom även i motsatsställning till parlamentet. 

Efter att Karl I tillträtt som konung förblev Buckinghams inflytande stort. Han bidrog till att försämra förhållandet även till den spanska fienden Frankrike. När Frankrike under egentlig ledning av kardinal Richelieu 1627 belägrade hugenotterna i den stora hamnstaden La Rochelle utrustade Buckingham en flotta för att undsätta de protestantiska hugenotterna. Detta företag misslyckades helt, mycket pga att Richelieu lyckats avspärra tillträdet från havssidan genom en väldig dammbyggnad.

Genom att England ställde sig på hugenotternas sida gentemot den franska kronan, försämrades möjligheterna till att gemensamt med Frankrike och Sverige verka för den protestantiska sidan i de våldsamma stridigheter som samtidigt pågick i trettioåriga kriget.

När Buckingham höll på att utrusta en andra flotta med målet La Rochelle mördades han 1628 av den puritanske fanatikern John Felton. Felton var militär och hade sårats i den första expeditionen till La Rochelle. Efter mordet firades Felton som en folkhjälte, medan det kom till våldsamma uppträden i parlamentet. Felton hängdes tre månader efter mordet.

thumb|The Duke of Buckingham by Rubens
'''George Villiers, 1st Duke of Buckingham''' (The Western Heritage, Eighth Edition, chapter 13, page 420</ref> and one of the most rewarded royal courtiers in all history.

==Early life==
He was born in Brooksby, George Villiers (1550-1604). His mother, Mary (1570 - 1632), daughter of Anthony Beaumont of Glenfield, Leicestershire, who was left a widow early, educated him for a courtier's life, sending him to France with Sir John Eliot. 

Villiers took very well to the training; he could dance well, fence well, and speak a little French. In August 1614, Villiers, reputedly "the handsomest-bodied man in all of England," was brought before the king, in the hope that the king would take a fancy to him, diminishing the power at court of then-favourite Robert Carr, 1st Earl of Somerset.

==Court life==
Following Villiers' introduction to James during the king's progress of that year, the king developed a strong affection for Villiers, calling him his 'sweet child and wife'; the personal relationships of James are a much debated topic, with Villers making the last of a succession of favourites on whom James lavished affection and rewards.  The extent to which there was a sexual element, or a physical sexual relationship, involved in these cases remains controversial.  Villiers reciprocated the king's love and wrote to James: "I naturally so love your person, and adore all your other parts, which are more than ever one man had" and "I desire only to live in the world for your sake". Villiers gained support from those opposed to the current favourite, Robert Carr, 1st Earl of Somerset. 

Under the king's patronage he prospered greatly. Villiers was knighted in Tudor period, Buckingham was left as the highest-ranking subject outside the Royal Family.<ref>There was no Duke of Norfolk at the time; the Duchy was "restored" in 1660.</ref> 

In the 1620s, Villiers acquired York House, Strand, which, apart from an interlude during the English Civil War, remained in the family until George Villiers, 2nd Duke of Buckingham sold it to developers for £30,000 in 1672. He made it a condition of the sale that his name and title be commemorated by George Street, Villiers Street, Duke Street, Of Alley, and Buckingham Street, some of which have survived into the twenty-first century.

==Marriage==
right|250px|thumb|Buckingham with his wife Katherine Manners, their daughter Mary and son George, 1628
Buckingham married the daughter of the 6th Earl of Rutland, Lady Katherine Manners, later ''suo jure'' Baroness de Ros, on 16 May 1620 despite the objections of her father. Buckingham was happy to grant valuable royal monopolies to her family. 

==Ireland== 
From 1616, Buckingham established a dominant influence in Irish affairs, beginning with the appointment of his client, Sir Oliver St John, as Lord Deputy, 1616-1622. Thence, he acquired control of the Irish customs farm (1618), dominated Irish patronage at court, particularly with the sale of Irish titles and honours, and (from 1618) began to build substantial Irish estates for himself, his family and clients - with the aid of a plantation lobby, composed of official clients in Dublin. To the same end, he secured the creation of an Irish Court of Wards in 1622. Buckingham's influence thus crucially sustained a forward Irish plantation policy into the 1620s.

==Relations with Parliament, 1621-1624==
The 1621 Parliament began an investigation into monopolies and other abuses in England and extended it later to Ireland; in this first session, Buckingham was quick to side with the Parliament to avoid action being taken against him. However, the king's decision in the summer of 1621 to send a commission of enquiry, including parliamentary firebrands, to Ireland threatened to expose Buckingham's growing, often clandestine interests there. Knowing that, in the summer, the king had assured the Spanish ambassador that the Parliament would not be allowed to imperil a Spanish matrimonial alliance, he therefore surreptitiously instigated a conflict between the Parliament and the king over the Spanish Match, which resulted in a premature dissolution of the Parliament in December 1621 and a hobbling of the Irish commission in 1622.  Irish reforms nevertheless introduced by Lionel Cranfield, Earl of Middlesex, in 1623-1624 were largely nullified by the impeachment and disgrace of the pacific Lord Treasurer in the violently anti-Spanish 1624 parliament - spurred on by Buckingham and Prince Charles.

==Foreign affairs==
In 1623, Buckingham accompanied Charles I, then Prince of Wales, to Infanta Maria. The negotiations had long been stuck, but it is believed that Buckingham's crassness was key to the total collapse of agreement; the Spanish ambassador asked Parliament to have Buckingham executed for his behaviour in von Mansfeld expedition to recover the Palatinate (1625). However, when the Duke of York became King Charles I, Buckingham was the only man to maintain his position from the court of James.

Buckingham led an expedition to repeat the actions of Sir Francis Drake by seizing the main Spanish port at Cádiz and burning the fleet in its harbour. Though his plan was tactically sound, landing further up the coast and marching the militia army on the city, the troops were ill-equipped, ill-disciplined and ill-trained. Coming upon a warehouse filled with wine, they simply got drunk, and the attack was called off. The English army briefly occupied a small port further down the coast before reboarding its ships.

This was followed by Buckingham leading the Army and the Navy to sea to intercept an anticipated Spanish silver fleet from Mexico and Spanish Latin America. However, the Spanish were forewarned by their intelligence and easily avoided the planned ambush. With supplies running out and men sick and dying from starvation and disease, the fleet limped home in embarrassment.

Buckingham then negotiated with the French regent, Cardinal Richelieu, for English ships to aid Richelieu in his fight against the French Protestants (Huguenots), in return for French aid against the Spanish occupying the Palatinate. The aid never materialised, and Parliament was disgusted and horrified at the thought of English Protestants fighting French Protestants. The plan only fuelled their fears of crypto-Catholicism at court. Buckingham himself, believing that the failure of his enterprise was the result of treachery by Richelieu, formulated an alliance among the churchman's many enemies, a policy which included support for the very Huguenots whom he had recently attacked.