<!--This was translated by me, The Obento Musubi, in pieces... it is a very rough translation, as translating Spanish is not my strength. Please better this by adding to this. Thanks! Note 2008-06-22: whoever "The Obento Musubi" is (didn't list themselves in this article's entry on the Translation Project page), others collaborated afterward. Hurmata-->
thumb|right|The Santa María school, circa [[1907.]]
The '''Santa María School massacre''' was a massacre of striking workers, mostly saltpeter (nitrate) miners, along with wives and children, committed by the Chilean army in Parliamentary Period in Chilean political history (1891-1925). With the massacre and an ensuing reign of terror, not only was the strike broken, but the workers' movement was thrown into limbo for over a decade. For decades afterward there was official suppression of knowledge of the incident, but in 2007 the government conducted a highly publicized commemoration of its centenary, including an official national day of mourning and the reinterment of the victims' remains. 

The site of the massacre was the Domingo Santa María School<ref>named after former Chilean president Santa María</ref>, where thousands of miners from different nitrate mines in Chile's far north had been camping for a week after converging on Iquique, the regional capital, to appeal for government intervention to improve their living and working conditions. The minister of the interior Rafael Sotomayor Gaete, decided to crush the strike, by army assault if need be. On 21 December, 1907, the commander of the troops at the scene, General [http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roberto_Silva_Renard Roberto Silva Renard], in accordance with this plan, informed the strikers' leaders that the strikers had one hour to disband or be fired upon. When the time was up and the leaders and the multitude stood firm, General Silva Renard gave his troops the order to fire. An initial volley that felled the negotiators was followed by a hail of rifle and machine gun fire aimed at the multitude of strikers and their accompanying wives and children. 

==Historical background==
Chilean society faced a crisis from the late 1800's onwards: what was delicately referred to at the time as the "social question"<ref>"fenómenos que a partir de la década de 1880 fueron conocidos bajo el nombre de «cuestión social»", phenomena which from the 1880s on were known under the name of «social question»; Grez 1995, Presentación, opening sentence</ref> -- namely, "the problem of worsening living and working conditions in the country's mining centers and major cities"<ref>Barr-Melej 2001:3</ref> <ref>Collier and Sater 1996:164ff</ref> The nitrate miners' strike of December 1907 was the last of a series of strikes and other forms of unrest that began in 1902, chief among them being the strike in Valparaíso in 1903 and the meat riots in Santiago in 1905.<ref>Correa et al. 2001</ref> In Chile, the workers' movement in general, and syndicalism in particular, got started among the nitrate miners. 

Geographically, the region Chileans today have come to refer to as the Norte Grande (Big North) lies within the Tarapacá and Antofagasta,<ref>http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Regiones_de_Chile</ref> <ref>Under the administrative structure of Chile as of 2007, the Norte Grande includes what are now termed the Regions of Tarapacá, Antofagasta, and saltpeter (sodium nitrate). Tensions provoked by the control of the mines had been one of the leading causes of the Chilean Civil War of 1891, when pro-Congress forces triumphed.

The mining of nitrate had become the mainstay of the nation's economy at the end of the nineteenth century, Chile being the exclusive producer worldwide. According to the census of November 28, 1907, Tarapacá Province held 110,000 inhabitants.<ref>Zolezzi 1999</ref> In the provinces of Tarapacá and Antofagasta about 40,000 workers were active in the nitrate industry, of whom about 13,000 came from Bolivia and Peru.<ref>Zolezzi 1999</ref> 

Life in the mining camps -- a nitrate works was known locally as an [http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oficina_salitrera ''oficina'', "office"], a term whose use extended to the adjoining settlement -- was grueling and physically dangerous.<ref>Collier and Sater 1996:163</ref> The enterprises exercised a severe control over the life and working conditions inside the mines, which rendered the workers extremely vulnerable to arbitrary actions perpetrated by the owners. Each ''oficina'' was a company town in which the mine owner owned the workers' housing, owned the company store (known in Chile as a [http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pulpería ''pulpería'']), monopolized all commerce, and employed a private police force. Each mining camp ran its own money system, paying its workers in tokens, which could be spent only within the mining camp. Mine managers frequently put off paydays, for up to three months.<ref>Correa et al. 2001</ref>

At the beginning of the 20th century, the above mentioned "social question" prompted unrest among the workers at the nitrate ''oficinas'' in the Tarapacá Province. They began to mobilize politically, repeatedly petitioning the national government in Santiago to get involved and bring about improvements in their dreadful living and working conditions. The Parliamentary Period governments, however, were reluctant to intervene in negotiations between employers and workers, and they tended to see large scale workers' movements (especially if accompanied by massive demonstrations) as incipient rebellions.<ref>Collier and Sater 1996</ref>

== The 18 Pence Strike and the massacre ==
On December 10, 1907, a general strike broke out in Tarapacá Province. This was the start of the 18 Pence Strike (''la huelga de los 18 peniques''), the name referring to the size of the wage the being demanded by workers in one particular mining occupation, workers known as ''jornaleros''. A large contingent of strikers traveled to the provincial capital, the port city of Iquique, carrying the flags of Chile, Peru, Bolivia, and Argentina. They camped at the horse racing track.<ref>Zolezzi 1</ref> As workers from other nitrate works swelled the ranks of this movement, nearly all commerce and industry in the north of the country was brought to a halt. The demands published by the strikers on December 16 in a memorial were as follows:

 }}

On December 16, thousands of striking workers from other industries arrived at Iquique in support of the nitrate miners' demands upon the provincial authorities, with the aim of prodding the authorities to act. Previous entreaties to the government, in particular petitions presented by delegations in 1901, 1903, and 1904, had been fruitless.

The national government in Santiago sent extra regiments by land and sea to reinforce the two regiments stationed in Iquique. President Rafael Sotomayor, was ordered to use all necessary means to force the miners to dissolve and return to work. 

More and more worker contingents joined the strike by the day. It has been estimated that by December 21 the strikers in Iquique numbered ten to twelve thousand. Soon after the journeys to Iquique began, this great conglomeration of workers met in Manuel Montt plaza and at the Santa María School, asking the government mediate between them and the bosses of the foreign (English) nitrate firms to resolve their demands. For their part, the bosses refused to negotiate until the workers went back to work. 

The acting intendant of Tarapacá Province, Julio Guzmán García, mediated negotiations with representatives of the ''pampinos'' (plains dwellers) until the arrival at the port December 19 of the titular intendant, Carlos Eastman Quiroga, and General Roberto Silva Renard, chief of the First Military Zone of the Chilean Army, accompanied by Colonel Sinforoso Ledesma. Their arrival was cheered by the workers because a nitrate miners' petition to the government nearly two years earlier, under the previous president, had received an encouraging response, although the demands had not been satisfied.<ref>Devés</ref> But the interior ministry felt no solidarity with the demands of the strikers. The ministry relayed orders to the strikers to leave the plaza and the school and gather at the horse racing track, where they were to board trains and return to work. They refused, sensing that if they went back to work, their requests would be ignored. 

In the face of the growing tension between the groups, on December 20, 1907 the strikers' representatives held a meeting with Intendant Eastman. Simultaneously, a decree published in the press announced the declaration of a state of siege, which entailed the suspension of constitutional rights. While the meeting with Intendant Eastman was taking place in the Buenaventura nitrate works, a group of workers and their families tried to leave the spot, but troops opened fire on them by the railroad tracks and kept shooting. As a result, six workers died and the rest of the group was wounded.<ref>Devés</ref>

The funerals of the slain workers were held the next day, December 21, 1907. Immediately at their conclusion, all workers were ordered to leave the school premises and vicinity and relocate to the Club Hípico (Horse Club). The workers refused to go, fearing they might be bombarded by the guns of warships which were lined up alongside the road they would have to travel. 
thumb|right|220px|General Roberto Silva Renard's account of the massacre. <small>''Collection of the [[Archivo Nacional de Chile''.</small>]]
At 2:30 in the afternoon, General Silva Renard told the leaders of the workers' committee that if the strikers did not start heading back to work within one hour, the troops would open fire on them. The workers' leaders refused to go, and only a small group of strikers left the plaza. 

At the hour indicated by Silva Renard, he ordered the soldiers to shoot the workers' leaders, who were on the school's roof, and they fell dead with the first volley. The multitude, desperate and trying to escape, surged toward the soldiers, and were fired upon with rifles and machine guns. After a period of firing from the Manual Montt plaza, the troops stormed school grounds with machine guns, firing into the school's playgrounds and classrooms, killing in a frenzy without regard to the women and children screaming for mercy. The survivors of the massacre were brought at saber point to the Club Hípico, whence they were sent back to work, where they were subjected to a reign of terror. 

thumb|De school Santa María in Iquique
Het '''Bloedbad in Santa María de Iquique''' (Iquique in Chili op 21 december 1907. Volgens de meest geaccepteerde schattingen verloren 2200 mensen het leven.

De stakingen begonnen op San Lorenzo, en spreidde zich snel uit over mijnen uit de hele regio Tarapacá. De stakers eisten een eerlijker betaling en betere werkomstandigheden. Op 16 december trokken duizenen mijnwerkers met hun familieleden naar Iquique om hun eisen aan de regionale regering voor te leggen. Zij verzochten de intendent Julio Guzmán García te bemiddelen met de (meest Engelse) mijneigenaars, maar de eigenaars weigerden te onderhandelen zolang de stakers niet terug aan het werk gingen. Tussen de 10.000 en 12.000 stakers bevonden zich in Iquique, en hadden zich verzameld op de Plaza Manuel Montt en de school Domingo Santa María

Op 19 december arriveerde het leger in Iquique, geleid door generaal Roberto Silva Renard en kolonel Sinforoso Ledesma. Er werd een staat van beleg afgekondigd en de grondwettelijke vrijheden opgeschort. Een aantal mijnwerkers en familieleden poogden op 20 december de plaats te verlaten, maar werden bij de spoorbaan neergeschoten. Zes kwamen om het leven, de anderen raakten gewond. Na hun begrafenis de volgende dag verzocht het leger de stakers de school Santa María te verlaten. Silva en Ledesma eisten om 2:30 's middags dat de stakers de school binnen een uur zouden verlaten, anders zouden zij het vuur openen. Een uur later hadden slechts enkele stakers het gebouw verlaten en gaf Silva de opdracht het vuur te openen. Als eerst werden degenen die zich op het dak van het schoolgebouw bevonden doodgeschoten. De menige probeerde in paniek de school uit te vluchten, maar werden onthaald op mitrailleurvuur. Andere militairen drongen door zij-ingangen het gebouw binnen en schoten met machinegeweren iedereen die zich in de klaslokalen, het merendeel vrouwen en kinderen, dood. Veel van de overlevenden werden later opgespoord en alsnog doodgeschoten, en iedereen die het bloedbad had meegemaakt werd geterroriseerd om niet uit te laten lekken welke gruwelijkheden hadden plaatsgevonden.
thumb|Postzegel uitgegeven n.a.v. de 100e herdenking van he bloedbad
De doden werden in naamloze massagraven begraven. Silva gaf een antal van 140, later 195 doden, en beweerde uit noodweer gehandeld te hebben. Schattingen over het precieze aantal doden lopen er uiteen. 3600 is een vaak genoemd nummer, maar in werkelijkheid ligt het waarschijnlijk rond de 2200. Het Congres van Chili stelde een onderzoek in en gebeurtenissen werden in 1913 in het Congres besproken, maar er werd verder geen actie ondernomen. Generaal Silva overleefde in 1914 ternauwernood een aanslag door de anarchist Antonio Ramón Ramón, broer van een van de slachtoffers van Iquique.