'''Rainer Wolfgang Rupp''' (* DDR und den Warschauer Vertrag tätig.

== Leben ==
Rainer Rupp wuchs in Spion anwarb, obwohl er eigentlich Entwicklungshelfer werden wollte. Ab 1969 war Rupp für die HVA in Brüssel tätig. 1970 traf er erstmals die Britin Ann-Christine Bowen, die er 1972 heiratete. Am 15. Januar 1977 kam er in die politische Abteilung des NATO-Wirtschaftsdirektorats. Vorerst operierte er unter dem Decknamen „Mosel“. 1979 wurde sein Name in Topas geändert. 1980 bekam seine Frau das erste ihrer drei Kinder und beendete ihre eigene Agententätigkeit, die sie unter dem Alias „Türkis“ ausgeübt hatte.

Unter dem Decknamen Topas (MfS-Kennung XV/3334/68) lieferte er in den folgenden zwölf Jahren Informationen aus dem Inneren der Cosmic Top Secret“ markiert war. 1989 mit dem Ende des Ostblocks endete auch die Spionagetätigkeit Rupps. Erst durch die Auswertung von MfS konnte die Identität Rupps aufgedeckt werden.

Am 30. Juli 1993 wurden Rupp und seine Ehefrau in Tageszeitungen junge Welt und Neues Deutschland.

<br /><!-- Force space -->

'''Rainer Rupp''' (born NATO headquarters in Brussels from 1977 until 1989, releasing documents of the highest importance to the Eastern Bloc.

Rupp grew up in leftist political leanings. In Pershing II rockets in Western Europe, as well as the central MC 161 document (''Cosmic Top Secret'') which summarized the NATO strategy as well as NATO's analysis of the Warsaw pact and its intentions. These documents were promptly transferred to the KGB.

He would photograph documents in his office, or take them home and photograph them in his encrypted as British wife knew about his activities and tried to persuade him to stop. He later said "At the time I did it, I believed it to be my moral duty."

NATO did not have any knowledge of the existence of Topaz until GDR officer defected in 1990. Busch however did not know the identity of Topaz. Several meetings of the secret services of a number of countries ensued with the aim of identifying Topaz, who took part in some of those meetings. With the help of GDR files that had fallen into the hands of the CIA after the dissolution of the GDR, Rupp was caught in 1993, while on vacation in Germany. He confessed and received a prison sentence of 12 years in 1994. He was released early in July 2000.