thumb|right|Draft of "Kubla Khan"
"'''Kubla Khan, or a Vision in a Dream. A Fragment.'''" is a Mongol and Chinese emperor Kublai Khan of the Yuan dynasty. Coleridge claimed he wrote the poem in the autumn of 1797 at a farmhouse near Exmoor, England, but it may have been composed on one of a number of other visits to the farm. It also may have been revised a number of times before it was first published in 1816.

==Structure and theme==
The poem's opening lines are often quoted, and it introduces the name Xanadu (or Shangdu, the summer palace of Kublai Khan):

{{quote|
:In Xanadu did Kubla Khan
:A stately pleasure-dome decree:
:Where Alph, the sacred river, ran
:Through caverns measureless to man
:Down to a sunless sea.
}}

Coleridge claimed that the poem was inspired by an creation, and some read sexual allusions throughout.

However, it is important to remember that inspiration for this poem also comes from Marco Polo's description of Shangdu and Kublai Khan from his book ''Il Milione'', which was included in Samuel Purchas' ''Pilgrimage'', Vol. XI, 231. 

When he declared himself emperor the historical Kublai claimed he had the Mandate of Heaven, a traditional Chinese concept of rule by divine permission, and therefore gained absolute control over an entire nation. Between warring and distributing the wealth his grandfather Genghis Khan had won, Kublai spent his summers in Xandu (better known now as Shangdu, or Xanadu) and had his subjects build him a home suitable for a son of God. 

This story is described in the first two lines of the poem, “In Xanadu did Kubla Khan/A stately pleasure-dome decree” (1-2). The end of the third paragraph gives us another close-up view of Kubla. At his home Kublai had, on hand, some ten thousand horses, which he used as a means of displaying his power. Only he and those to whom he gave explicit permission (for committing miscellaneous acts of valour) were allowed to drink their milk. Hence the closing image of “the milk of Paradise.” (54)
{{quote|
:For he on honey-dew hath fed,
:And drunk the milk of Paradise.
}}

'''''Kubla Khan''''', oppure "Visione in un sogno", come annota l'autore, è un poemetto, mai completato, di Samuel Taylor Coleridge.
Il poeta affermò di averlo scritto nell'autunno del 1797, ma fu pubblicato per la prima volta nel 1816.

==L'opera==
L'opera, per quanto non abbia una trama vera e propria essendo incompiuta, narra la costruzione per ordine di Kubla Khan, appunto, di un palazzo per il piacere nella capitale del regno, la città di Xanadu. L'attenzione si sposta poi sull'incredibile paesaggio circostante, in seguito sulla visione di una fanciulla, della quale il poeta lamenta di non saper riprodurre il canto. 
Scritto sotto l'effetto dell'oppio, il poemetto dimostra la potenza dell'immaginazione, in grado di creare mondi e spazi incommensurabili oltre il reale; si rappresentano scene di luoghi vastissimi e romanticamente sublimi, nei quali l'opera dell'uomo, il palazzo di Kubla Khan, si incastona nella natura, la quale poi esplode in tutta la sua forza in scenari selvaggi e impetuosi. 
Il carattere onirico dell'opera fa sì che i diversi quadri si susseguano senza un preciso collegamento tra loro, dovendo principalmente dare sensazioni e immagini improvvise in pieno stile romantico.