'''John Ceiriog Hughes''' (Welsh poet and well-known  collector of Welsh folk tunes. Sometimes referred to as the 'Robert Burns of Wales'. ''Ceiriog'' was born at ''Penybryn'' farm overlooking the village of Denbighshire in north-east Wales.  He worked as a railway clerk in Manchester and London.  He was employed as a station master at Caersws railway station station from 1868 until his death in 1877

=== Poetry ===
Through his desire to restore simplicity of diction and emotional sincerity, he did for Welsh poetry what Wordsworth and Coleridge did for English poetry.  He became famous winning a serious of prizes for his poems in the 1850's. His first collection of poetry was published in 1860 and is called ''Oriau'r Hwyr'' (“Evening Hours”). As well as writing poetry he wrote many light hearted lyrics which he adapted to old Welsh tunes, or the original music of various composers.  Many of his songs were written to folk airs. Ceiriog Hughes' song lyrics include ''Dafydd y Garreg Wen'' ("David of the White Rock") and ''Clychau Aberdyfi'' ("The Bells of Aberdyfi").  He also wrote the Welsh words to the song, "God Bless the Prince of Wales". The Welsh language version of the song ''The Ash Grove'' is putatively attributed to Ceiriog Hughes.

===Musicologist===
His fascination with Welsh folk music led to an investigation of the history of the music and particularly the harpists who would often accompany then. This led to a grand project to publish four volumes of  Welsh airs, of which only the first volume actually made it to press in 1863: ''Cant O Ganeuon'' ("A Hundred Songs").

:''Gweler hefyd Ceiriog (gwahaniaethu).''
Gymro oedd '''John Ceiriog Hughes''' (25 Medi, 1832 - 23 Ebrill, 1887), a aned yn Llanarmon Dyffryn Ceiriog. Dan ei enw barddol adnabyddus '''Ceiriog''' yr oedd efallai y mwyaf poblogaidd a dylanwadol o feirdd Cymru yn ail hanner y 19eg ganrif. Roedd yn gyfaill i R. J. Derfel, Creuddynfab ac Idris Fychan.

Bardd telynegol oedd Ceiriog. Canai ar yr hen alawon Cymreig. Daeth i sylw cenedlaethol pan enillodd yn Eisteddfod Fawr Llangollen yn 1858 am rieingerdd, ''Myfanwy Fychan o Gastell Dinas Bran''. Mae rhai o'i gerddi yn aros yn boblogaidd heddiw, er enghraifft ''Dafydd y Garreg Wen'', ''Nant y Mynydd'', a'r dilyniant o gerddi ''Alun Mabon'' gyda'u llinellau enwog am barhad cenedl y Cymry dros y canrifoedd,
:Aros mae'r mynyddau mawr,
:Rhuo trostynt mae y gwynt.

Er bod ei ganeuon yn bruddglwyfus a sentimental yn ôl safonau diweddar, medrai ysgrifennu ddychanol hefyd, gan ddychanu sefydliadau fel yr Eisteddfod a thuedd amlwg yr oes at barchusrwydd a lledneisrwydd, yn arbennig yn y cyfrolau ''Gohebiaethau Syr Meurig Crynswth''.