'''მუსიკათმცოდნეობა''' არის მეცნიერება მუსიკის შესახებ, ხელოვნებათმცოდნეობის დარგი.

==მუსიკისმცოდნეობის დარგები==

*'''მუსიკის თეორია''' – მოიცავს სწავლებებს მელოდიის, ჰარმონიის, პოლიფონიის, მუსიკალური რიტმისა და მეტრის, მუსიკალურ ნაწარმოებთა და ანალიზის შესახებ;
*'''მუსიკის ისტორია''';
*'''მუსიკალური ეთნოგრაფია''' – მეცნიერება ხალხური მუსიკალური შემოქმედების შესახებ;
*'''მუსიკალურ საკრავთმცოდნეობა''';
*'''მუსიკის კრიტიკა'''.  

მეცნიერებათშორისი დისციპლინებია: მუსიკალური აკუსტიკა – მუსიკისმცოდნეობისა და ზოგადი აკუსტიკის ნაწილი, მუსიკის ფსიქოლოგია – მუსიკისმცოდნეობისა და ფსიქოლოგიის ნაწილი.

==გამოჩენილი მუსიკათმცოდნეები==

*კარპენტერი, ალეხო
*კოსტავა, მერაბ
*ჰანსლიკი, ედუარდ
….

იხ. სრული ნუსხა.

==ქართული რესურსები ინტერნეტში==

* ბმული 1
* ბმული 2

*
კატეგორია:კულტურული მეცნიერებები

'''Musicology''' (Greek: ''μουσική'' = "music" and ''λόγος'' = "word" or "reason") is the scholarly study of music. The word is used in narrow, broad and intermediate senses. In the narrow sense, musicology is confined to the music history of Western cultural elites. In the intermediate sense, it includes all relevant humanities and a range of musical forms, styles, genres and traditions. In the broad sense, it includes all musically relevant disciplines and all manifestations of music in all cultures. The broad meaning corresponds most closely to the word's etymology, the entry on "musicology" in Grove's dictionary, the entry on "Musikwissenschaft" in ''Musik in Geschichte und Gegenwart'', and the classic approach of Adler (1885). 

In the broad definition, the parent disciplines of musicology include history; cultural studies and gender studies; philosophy, aesthetics and semiotics; ethnology and cultural anthropology; archeology and prehistory; psychology and sociology; physiology and the neurosciences; acoustics and psychoacoustics; and computer/information sciences and mathematics. Musicology also has two central, practically oriented subdisciplines with no parent discipline: performance practice and research, and the theory, analysis and composition of music. The disciplinary neighbors of musicology address other forms of art, performance, ritual and communication, including the history and theory of the visual and plastic arts and of architecture; linguistics, literature and theater; religion and theology; and sport. Musical knowledge and know-how are applied in medicine, education and therapy, which may be regarded as the parent disciplines of Applied Musicology.

==Types==
=== Historical Musicology ===

'''Music history''' or '''historical musicology''' is a diverse subfield of the broader discipline of musicology that studies the composition, performance, reception, and criticism of music over time. Historical studies of music are for example concerned with a composer's life and works, the developments of styles and genres (e. g. baroque concertos), the social function of music for a particular group of people (e. g. court music), or modes of performance at a particular place and time (e. g. Johann Sebastian Bach's choir in Leipzig). Like the comparable field of art history, different branches and schools of historical musicology emphasize different types of musical works and different approaches to music.  There are also national differences in the definition of historical musicology.  

In theory, "music history" could refer to the study of the history of any type or genre of music (e.g., the history of rock). In practice, these research topics are more often considered within ethnomusicology (see below). 

The methods of historical musicology include source studies (esp. manuscript studies), paleography, philology (especially textual criticism), style criticism, historiography (the choice of historical method), musical analysis, and iconography. The application of musical analysis to further these goals is often a part of music history, though pure analysis or the development of new tools of music analysis is more likely to be seen in the field of music theory.

The intellectual products of music historians include editions of musical works, biography of composers and other musicians, studies of the relationship between words and music, and the reflections upon the place of music in society.

=== Ethnomusicology ===

Western musics, it also includes the study of Western music from an anthropological or sociological perspective. 

Ethnomusicologists often apply theories and methods from cultural anthropology, cultural studies and sociology as well as other disciplines in the social sciences and humanities. Though some ethnomusicologists primarily conduct historical studies, the majority are involved in long-term participant observation. Therefore, ethnomusicological work can be characterized as featuring a substantial, intensive ethnographic component.

Closely related to ethnomusicology is the emerging branch of sociomusicology.

=== Intersections of Historical Musicology and Ethnomusicology ===
Several forms of musical inquiry combine the two larger fields of musicology.  Some draw upon the tools or methodologies of ethnomusicology to analyze the main repertories of historical musicology.  Others explore popular music primarily from a cultural perspective, yet also employ tools of Western tonal theory to make analytic observations.

==== New Musicology ====

''cultural study, analysis, and criticism of music. Such work may be based on postcolonial theory, or the work of Theodor Adorno. Although New Musicology emerged from within historical musicology, the emphasis on cultural study within the Western art music tradition places New Musicology at the junction between historical, ethnological and sociological research in music.  

New musicology was a reaction against traditional historical musicology, which according to Susan McClary, "fastidiously declares issues of musical signification off-limits to those engaged in legitimate scholarship." Today, many musicologists no longer distinguish between musicology and New Musicology, since many of the scholarly concerns that used to be associated New Musicology have now become mainstream, and the term "new" clearly no longer applies.

==== Popular Music Studies ====

Popular music studies emerged in the 1980s as an increasing number of musicologists, ethnomusicologists, and other varieties of historians of American and European culture began to write about popular musics past and present. The first journal focusing on popular music studies was [http://www.cambridge.org/journals/journal_catalogue.asp?mnemonic=pmu Popular Music], which began publication in 1981. It was not until 1994 that an academic society solely devoted to the topic was formed, the [http://www.iaspm.net/ IASPM] (the International Association for the Study of Popular Music).

=== Psychology and cognition ===

Music psychology applies the content and methods of all subdisciplines of psychology (perception, cognition, motivation, personality and so on) to all aspects of musical behaviour and experience (performance, listening, composition).

Music cognition is the study of music as information, from the viewpoint of cognitive science. Since it primarily addresses the processing of musical information by humans, it may be regarded as a subdiscipline of music psychology. The discipline shares the interdisciplinary nature of fields such as cognitive linguistics.

=== Music theory, analysis and composition ===

'''Music theory''' is a field of study that describes the elements of notation and, on occasion, musical sound itself.  Broadly, theory may include any statement, belief, or conception of or about music (Boretz, 1995).  A person who studies or practices music theory is a '''music theorist'''.

Some music theorists attempt to explain the techniques composers use by establishing rules and patterns.  Others model the experience of listening to or performing music.  Though extremely diverse in their interests and commitments, many Western music theorists are united in their belief that the acts of composing, performing, and listening to music may be explicated to a high degree of detail (this, as opposed to a conception of musical expression as fundamentally ineffable except in musical sounds). Generally, works of music theory are both descriptive and prescriptive, attempting both to define practice and to influence later practice.  Thus, music theory generally lags behind practice in important ways, but also points towards future exploration, composition, and performance.  

Musicians study music theory in order to be able to understand the structural relationships in the (nearly always notated) music, and composers study music theory in order to be able to understand how to produce effects and to structure their own works.  Composers may study music theory in order to guide their precompositional and compositional decisions.  Broadly speaking, music theory in the Western tradition focuses on harmony and counterpoint, and then uses these to explain large scale structure and the creation of melody.

=== Performance practice and research ===

Performance practice draws on many of the tools of historical musicology to answer the specific question of how music was performed in various places at various times in the past. Although previously confined to early music, recent research in performance practice has embraced questions such as how the early history of recording affected the use of vibrato in classical music, or instruments in Klezmer.

Within the rubric of musicology, performance practice tends to emphasize the collection and synthesis of evidence about how music should be performed.  The important other side, learning how to sing authentically or perform an historical instrument is usually part of conservatory or other performance training.  However, many top researchers in performance practice are also excellent musicians.