עוד במאה ה-15 משנתגלה עבדים וסחורות נוספות, ובהן השנהב, ממנו נגזר שם המדינה.

בשנת מושבה צרפתית עד שנת 1946. משנת 1946 ועד 1958 הייתה חוף השנהב דומיניון תחת מנדט צרפתי שנועד להכשירה לקבלת עצמאות.

בנובמבר 1958 עם סיום השלטון הקולוניאלי הצרפתי קיבלה חוף השנהב את עצמאותה. השלטון החדש, בראשות 
דמוקרטיות, אך היה מנהיג אהוב ונערץ על העם והוביל את המדינה גם בתקופות של אבטלה ומיתון עמוקים. במהלך שלטונו הוא דיכא שתי מרידות, אך תקופת שלטונו התאפיינה בשקט פנימי תוך שמירה על איזון והבנה בין הזרמים הדתיים והאתניים השונים.

בשנת 1990 ערך הופואה-בואני בחירות דמוקרטיות ונבחר לנשיאות. הוא שלט עד שנת מותו - 1993.
את מקומו תפס הנרי קונן-בדי, שערך בחירות בשנת 1995 וזכה ברוב של 95%. קונן-בדי לא הצליח לשמור על הקו השקט והמפוייס של קודמו, וגם ניצחונו המכריע בבחירות עורר תמיהות.  בשנת 1999 נערכה הפיכה צבאית על ידי קבוצת גנרלים בראשות רוברט גואיי.  קונן-בדי נמלט מהמדינה לפריז.

הכת הצבאית הפגינה כוונות טובות והטיפה לסגפנות, מלחמה בשחיתות ואפילו דמוקרטיה, ועל כן ערכה בשנת 2000 בחירות חדשות כשמול רוברט גואיי ניצב לורן גבאגבו (gbagbu). מערכת הבחירות הייתה סוערת ולא דמוקרטית, אשר גלשו למהומות והתפרעויות שגבו את חייהם של עשרות, ובסופן עלה גבאגבו.

כדי למנוע קיטוב וכיתתיות, במיוחד על רקע דתי, נשללה זכותו של המועמד המוסלמי קוואטארה להתמודד בבחירות, ומיד עם כינון הממשלה החדשה התחדשו מהומות הרחוב, הפעם על רקע אתני ודתי.

The early '''history of Côte d'Ivoire''' is virtually unknown, although it is thought that a Gold Coast (now Ghana) border. Early contacts were limited to a few missionaries because of the inhospitable coastline and settlers' fear of the inhabitants.

In the Akan groups - the Bouët-Willaumez signed treaties with the kings of the Grand Bassam and Assinie regions, placing their territories under a French protectorate. French explorers, missionaries, trading companies, and soldiers gradually extended the area under French control inland from the lagoon region. However, pacification was not accomplished until 1915.

== French Period ==
Côte d'Ivoire officially became a French colony on March 10, 1893. Louis Gustave Binger, who had explored the Gold Coast frontier, was named the first governor. He negotiated boundary treaties with Liberia and the United Kingdom (for the Gold Coast) and later started the campaign against Almany Samory, a Malinké chief, who fought against the French until 1898.

From Third Republic. Until the period following World War II, governmental affairs in French West Africa were administered from Paris. France's policy in West Africa was reflected mainly in its philosophy of "association", meaning that all Africans in Côte d'Ivoire were officially French "subjects" without rights to representation in Africa or France.

In World War II, the Charles De Gaulle's provisional government assumed control of all French West Africa. The Brazzaville conference in Fourth Republic in 1946, and France's gratitude for African loyalty during World War II led to far-reaching governmental reforms in 1946. French citizenship was granted to all African "subjects," the right to organize politically was recognized, and various forms of forced labor were abolished.

A turning point in relations with France was reached with the 1956 Overseas Reform Act (''Loi Cadre'' ), which transferred a number of powers from Paris to elected territorial governments in French West Africa and also removed remaining voting inequalities.

== Independence ==
In December 1958, Côte d'Ivoire became an autonomous republic within the French Community as a result of a referendum that brought community status to all members of the old Federation of French West Africa except Guinea, which had voted against association. Côte d'Ivoire became independent on August 7, 1960, and permitted its community membership to lapse. It established the commercial city Abidjan as its capital. 

Côte d'Ivoire's contemporary political history is closely associated with the career of Parti Démocratique de la Côte d'Ivoire'' (PDCI) until his death on December 7, 1993. He was one of the founders of the ''Rassemblement Démocratique Africain'' (RDA), the leading pre-independence inter-territorial political party for all of the French West African territories except Mauritania.

Houphouët-Boigny first came to political prominence in 1944 as founder of the ''Syndicat Agricole Africain'', an organization that won improved conditions for African farmers and formed a nucleus for the PDCI. After World War II, he was elected by a narrow margin to the first Constituent Assembly. Representing Côte d'Ivoire in the French National Assembly from 1946 to 1959, he devoted much of his effort to inter-territorial political organization and further amelioration of labor conditions. After his thirteen-year service in the French National Assembly, including almost three years as a minister in the French Government, he became Côte d'Ivoire's first prime minister in April 1959, and the following year was elected its first president.

In May 1959, Houphouët-Boigny reinforced his position as a dominant figure in West Africa by leading Côte d'Ivoire, Upper Volta (Burkina), and Dahomey (Benin) into the Council of the Entente, a regional organization promoting economic development. He maintained that the road to African solidarity was through step-by-step economic and political cooperation, recognizing the principle of non-intervention in the internal affairs of other African states.

Houphouët-Boigny was considerably more conservative than most African leaders of the post-colonial period, maintaining close ties to the west and rejecting the leftist and anti-western stance of many leaders at the time. This contributed to the country's economic and political stability.

The first multiparty presidential elections were held in October 1990 and Houphouët-Boigny won convincingly.

==1990s==
Houphouët-Boigny died on December 7, 1993, and was succeeded by his deputy Henri Konan Bédié who was the President of the Parliament.

==2000s==

He was overthrown on December 24, 1999 by General coup d'état'' in the history of Côte d'Ivoire. An economic downturn followed, and the junta promised to return the country to democratic rule in 2000.