thumb|right|300px|Untitled (Skull), 1981
thumb|right|300px|Boy and Dog In A Johnnyjump, 1982 (Cropped)

'''Jean-Michel Basquiat'''  (American Neo-expressionist artist. Basquiat's paintings continue to influence modern day artists and command high prices.

==Biography==
Basquiat's mother, Matilde, was Puerto Rican and his father, Gerard Jean-Baptiste, is of Haitian origin and a former Haitian Minister of the Interior. Because of his parents' nationalities, Basquiat was fluent in French, Spanish, and English and often read Symbolist poetry, mythology, history and medical texts, particularly Gray's Anatomy in those languages.<ref></ref> At an early age, Basquiat displayed an aptitude for art and was encouraged by his mother to draw, paint, and to participate in other art-related activities.  In 1977, when he was 17, Basquiat and his friend Al Diaz started spray-painting graffiti art on slum buildings in lower Manhattan, adding the infamous signature of "SAMO" or "SAMO shit" (''i.e.'', "same ol' shit"). The graphics were pithy messages such as "Plush safe he think; SAMO" and "SAMO is an escape clause". In December 1978, the ''Village Voice'' published an article about the writings.<ref></ref> The SAMO project ended with the epitaph SAMO IS DEAD written on the walls of SoHo buildings. 

In 1978, Basquiat dropped out of high school and left home, a year before graduating. He moved into the city and lived with friends, surviving by selling T-shirts and postcards on the street, and working in the Unique Clothing Warehouse on Broadway. By 1979, however, Basquiat gained a certain celebrity status amidst the thriving art scene of East Village, for his regular appearances on Blondie's video "Rapture" as a replacement for DJ Grandmaster Flash when he was a no-show. 

Basquiat first started to gain recognition as an artist in June 1980, when he participated in ''Collaborative Projects Incorporated (Colab). In 1981, poet, art critic and cultural provocateur Rene Ricard published "The Radiant Child" in ''Artforum'' magazine, helping to launch Basquiat's career to an international stage.  During the next few years, he continued exhibiting his works around New York alongside artists such as Keith Haring, Barbara Kruger, as well as internationally, promoted by such gallery owners and patrons as Annina Nosei, Vrej Baghoomian, Larry Gagosian, Mary Boone and Bruno Bischofberger. 

By 1982, Basquiat was showing regularly alongside Neo-expressionist movement. He started dating an aspiring and then-unknown performer named Madonna in the fall of 1982. In 1982, Basquiat met Andy Warhol, with whom he collaborated extensively, eventually forging a close, if strained, friendship. He was also briefly involved with artist David Bowes.<ref></ref><ref>Randy P. Conner, David Hatfield Sparks, ''Queering Creole Spiritual Traditions'', Haworth Press, 2004, p299. ISBN 1560233516</ref>

By 1984, many of Basquiat's friends were concerned about his excessive drug use and increasingly erratic behavior, including signs of paranoia. Basquiat had developed a frequent heroin habit by this point, starting from his early years living among the junkies and street artists in New York's underground. On February 10, 1985, Basquiat appeared on the cover of ''The New York Times Magazine'' in a feature entitled "New Art, New Money: The Marketing of an American Artist". As Basquiat's international success heightened, his works were shown in solo exhibitions across major European capitals. 

Basquiat died of mixed-drug toxicity (he had been combining cocaine and heroin, known as "speedballing") in his Great Jones Street loft/studio in 1988 several days before what would have been Basquiat's second trip to the film biography entitled ''Basquiat'' was made, directed by Julian Schnabel, with actor Jeffrey Wright playing Basquiat.

==Artistic activities ==
Basquiat's art career is known for his three broad, though overlapping styles. In the earliest period, from 1980 to late 1982, Basquiat used painterly gestures on canvas, often depicting skeletal figures and mask-like faces that expressed his obsession with mortality. Other frequently depicted imagery such as automobiles, buildings, police, children's sidewalk games, and graffiti came from his experience painting on the city streets. A middle period from late 1982 to 1985 featured multipanel paintings and individual canvases with exposed stretcher bars, the surface dense with writing, collage and seemingly unrelated imagery. 

These works reveal a strong interest in Basquiat's black identity and his identification with historical and contemporary black figures and events. On one occasion Basquiat painted his girlfriend's dress, with his words, a "Little Shit Brown". The final period, from about 1986 to Basquiat's death in 1988, displays a new type of figurative depiction, in a new  style with different symbols and content from new sources. This period seems to have also had a profound impact on the styles of artists who admired Basquiat's work. Basquiat's lasting creative influence is immediately recognizable in the work of subsequent and self-taught generational artists such as Mark Gonzales, Kelly D. Williams, and Raymond Morris.

In 1982, Basquiat became friends with pop artist Andy Warhol and the two made a number of collaborative works. They also painted together, influencing each others' work. Some speculated that Andy Warhol was merely using Basquiat for some of his techniques and insight. Their relationship continued until Warhol's death in 1987. Warhol's death was very distressing for Basquiat, and it is speculated by Phoebe Hoban, in ''Basquiat'', her 1998 biography on the artist, that Warhol's death was a turning point for Basquiat, and that afterwards his drug addiction and depression began to spiral.

'''Jean-Michel Basquiat''' (neo-expressionistisch (en van oorsprong graffiti)-kunstenaar van Haïtiaanse en Porto Ricaanse afkomst. Hij heeft korte tijd samengewerkt met Andy Warhol. 

Verguisd en geliefd in de kunstwereld is Basquiat op zeer jonge leeftijd door een overdosis aan zijn einde gekomen. Na eind jaren zeventig samen met zijn vriend Al Diaz als graffiti-artiest onder de naam SAMO (van 'same old shit') gewerkt te hebben, heeft hij vanaf begin jaren 80 zeer explosieve ezelwerken geproduceerd. De New-York kunstscene in de jaren tachtig was niet bepaald verstoken van geld en er werden dan ook werken voor ongelooflijke bedragen verhandeld.

Aan de ene kant wordt Basquiat gezien als een soort 'troetel-neger' van de kunstwereld, maar aan de andere kant heeft hij wel degelijk iets bijgedragen en wordt hij ook veel geprezen.  Zijn naïeve stijl met elementen uit zijn eigen ervaring zijn zeer expresief en kleurrijk en met een grote mate van vrijheid geschilderd. Meestal zijn het grote formaten in acryl met daaroverheen lijntekeningen en teksten met oil-paintstick.

Hoewel zijn werk getergd kan overkomen, sijpelt er ook een bepaalde haast kinderlijke vreugde doorheen. Ook impliceert het door de snelle manier van werken een bijna chaotische snelheid, die nog versterkt wordt door de veelheid aan symbolen. Hoewel dit op het eerste gezicht vaak een sinicure en triviaal lijkt, zit er wel degelijk een doordachte lijn in.