2. Dünya Savaşı boyunca Nazi Almanyasının İngiltereyi abluka altında tutmak için geliştirilmiş bir denizaltı taktiğidir. Kurt sürüsü anlamına gelen ''wolfpack'' adını müttefiklerden almıştır bu startejinin asıl adı ''Gruppe Taktiken'', Türkçede "grup taktiği" anlamına gelmektedir. Amaç olabildiğince düşman gemisi batırmaktır burda önemli olan tonaj bakımından batırılan gemi miktarıdır.

Savaşın ilk yıllarında bu taktik sayasinde İngiltere adası nerdeyse Almanyaya teslim olacak duruma kadar kötü duruma düşmüştür.

Strtejinin temelinde denizaltılar birbirlerine yakın bölgelerde devriye gezerler ve herhangi bir konvoy gördüklerinde yakın bölgelerde bulunan diğer denizaltılarına haber verirlerdi. Alman u-boat ları avlamak için tasarlanmışlardı su üstünde su altında olduklarından daha hızlıydılar konvoy haberini alan diğer denizaltılar süratle hedefe ilerler ve hedeflerini vururlardı. Savaşın ilerleyen dönemlerinde wolfpackler avcı konumundan birer av konumuna düşmüşlerdir.

The term '''wolf pack''' refers to the mass-attack tactics against German Battle of the Atlantic and submarines of the United States Navy against Japanese shipping in the Pacific Ocean in World War II.

English as "wolf pack" (''Wolfsrudel''), a more accurate metaphoric, but not literal, translation.

U-boat movements were controlled by the ''Befehlshaber der Unterseeboote'' (BdU; English translation: "Commander of Submarines") much more closely than American submarines, which were given tremendous independence once on patrol. Accordingly, U-boats usually patrolled separately, often strung out in co-ordinated lines across likely convoy routes (usually merchants and small vulnerable destroyers), only being ordered to congregate after one located a convoy and alerted the BdU, so a ''Rudel'' consisted of as many U-boats as could reach the scene of the attack. With the exception of the orders given by the BdU, U-Boat commanders could attack as they saw fit. Often the U-Boat commanders were given a probable number of U-Boats that would show up, and then when they were in contact with the convoy, make call signs to see how many had arrived. If the number was sufficient, or if the threat of increased escorts was a possibility, they would attack.

American wolf packs, officially called ''coordinated attack groups'', usually comprised three boats that patrolled in close company and organized before they left port under the command of the senior captain of the three. "Swede" Momsen devised the tactics and led the first American wolf pack from Midway on 1 October, 1943 - , , and .

Although the wolf packs proved a serious threat to Allied shipping, the Allies developed countermeasures to turn the U-boat organization against itself.  Most notably was the fact that wolf packs required extensive radio communication to coordinate the attacks.  This left the U-boats vulnerable to a device called the High Frequency Direction Finder (HF/DF or "Huff-Duff") which allowed Allied naval forces to determine the location of the enemy boats transmitting and attack them.  Also, effective air cover, both long-range planes with radar, and escort carriers and blimps, allowed U-boats to be spotted as they shadowed a convoy (waiting for the cover of night to attack). The destroyers of the Atlantic also used depth charges and other small mines which could be dropped off the ships' side.

Wolf packs fell out of use during the bastions.) However, with the opening shots of the Tomahawk missiles at USS ''Providence'' was the first boat to fire its entire load of missiles and earn the nickname "Big Dog of the Red Sea Wolf Pack."

Recently the name "wolf pack" has been assigned to Iranian missile boat tactis in an hypothetical clash with U.S. Navy;a massive attack of small-size boat armed with missiles and torpedoes on a single (or few) ships in order to overrun or saturate the Aegis 
system;in such attacks even suicide boat could be deployed.   