thumb|300px|Deathwatch marines. Note the different shoulder-pad insignias
<!-- FAIR USE of Deathwatch.jpg: see image description page at http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Image:Deathwatch.jpg for rationale -->

In the tabletop Space Marine organisations. They act as the military arm of the Inquisition.

==Organization==
As the Chamber Militant of the Ordo Xenos, the Deathwatch is tasked with the study and, if necessary, the extermination of alien races encountered by the Imperium. They are also tasked with the observation of alien races, and the acquisition of their technology for further study by the Adeptus Mechanicus.

The Deathwatch are uniquely organized in that the Marines that make up the Deathwatch are drawn from many different Chapters. They are then specially trained to counter Xeno threats and are sworn to serve a term with the Deathwatch before returning to their Chapter of origin. The Space Marine Legions and subsequent Chapters were bound by ancient oath to provide troops to the Deathwatch. However, particularly among some of the more radical Space Marine Chapters, this can be a great test of duty, especially for those that see the Inquisition as corrupt and an enemy of the independence of the Adeptus Astartes. 

Although there is no question of any Chapter or Space Marine failing to fulfill their ancient pledges, Chapters like the Iron Hands, Dark Angels, and Blood Angels have a notoriously strained relationship with the Inquisition. It is not unheard of for radical Ordo Xenos Inquisitors to find the secondment of Deathwatch troops facilitated by aiding a chapter against the machinations of a puritanical Ordo Heriticus Inquisitor. Other Chapters such as the Ultramarines, Crimson Fists and Imperial Fists have a far closer relationship with the Inquisition as a whole and the Ordo Xenos itself. Marines from these Chapters are more frequently and in greater number inducted into the Deathwatch, although a Kill-Team may be made up of any variety of Marines as the resources of the Ordo Xenos Militant Order are moved around the galaxy. Marines making up a Deathwatch kill team can vary hugely in philosophy, culture and custom but are bound together by their loyalty to the Emperor and their zealous hatred of the alien enemies of mankind. A Space Marine will remain with the Deathwatch until the Inquisitor leading the detachment deems that necessary tasks have been completed.

==Combat Doctrine==
Deathwatch Space Marines will usually operate in individual Tactical Squads, known as Kill Teams. Each Kill Team will be led by an Inquisitor, Brother-Captain or Librarian. Their missions ranging from those undertaken alone and without support, attempting to accomplish their goals with minimal combat engagement; to open battle re-enforcing allied forces against alien incursions.

The highly perilous and vital nature of their missions means that Kill Teams have access to exceedingly rare or advanced equipment, such as Heavy Bolter Gyro Suspensors, M.40 targeters, and numerous types of specialist ammunition, such as the fragmentation Metal Storm shells or the high-powered Kraken penetrator bolts. If the situation offers no alternative, they will utilize alien weaponry and equipment to accomplish their mission. The Deathwatch often utilises unconventional means of insertion, such as teleportation, high altitude grav-chute drops and Demiurg Termite tanks. 

Sometimes, the situation may be more than even a dozen elite Space Marines can handle, and because of this, Deathwatch members are able to freely requisition any and all Imperial forces they deem necessary to complete their task, from individual brother Space Marines to entire regiments of Imperial Guard.

{{Infobox Warhammer 40,000 Chapters
|title=Караул Смерти
|image=
|primarch=
|homeworld=
|battlecry=
|colourscheme=чёрный
}}
В вымышленной вселенной космодесантников, посвятивших жизнь охоте на ксенос (чужих). Они принадлежат к Боевому Крылу Ордо Ксенос, уполномоченные Инквизицией изучать, сдерживать и, в основном, уничтожать ксено-культуры.

Вместо следования стандартной схеме организации ордена, Космодесантники набираются из многих Орденов. Эти ордена связаны священными обетами держать специальный отряд космодесанта именно для этой цели. Эти отряды могут быть собраны, чтобы сражаться вместе, если того потребует ситуация.

Гигантские крепости вращаются на орбитах пустынных миров на краю Галактики, неся постоянную вахту на страже Империума. Также по всему Империуму рассыпаны секретные базы, служащие точками сбора для их Крестовых походов.

Воины которые сражаются, получают честь выкрасить доспех в черный цвет (показывая их преданность Императору), но оставляя на одном из наплечников символ своего Ордена, дабы не оскорблять дух доспеха. На другой наплечник наносится символ Караула Смерти. После принятия в Караул нет определенного срока службы, он зависит от приказа командира. Каждый космодесантник может служить определенное время, либо на срок какой либо миссии (возможно, исчисляемый годами). Когда миссия будет завершена, космодесантник вернется в Орден, связанный обетом молчания, и его долг будет исполнен.