Yon gouvènman sistèm kote tout biznis peyi-a regle pa yon ti group minorite se yon oligachi.  Mo grèk ολιγαρχία, dekonpoze an ''akiya'' (govènman) ak ''olig'' (minorite).  Nan kalite gouvènman sila, minorite sa se yo ki sèl chèf, se yo ki kontrole domèn ekonomik, se yo ki an chaj transmision infòmasion, afè entènasional, etc.  Ki la koz, souvan, jounalis klasifie minorite sa kòm ''klas elite'' peyi-a.  Nan yon oligachi, souvan gen tansion.  Yon tansion ki rezilte paske, pliziè fwa, majorite peyi-a reziste pouvwa klas elite sa.  Elite yo yo-menm, fè tout sa ki fezab pou yo konsolide pouvwa yo.  Yon sitiasion ki souvan tèmine pa de (2) rezilta.  Youn, class elite-a ka peze pi di, masakre, kidnape (oubien fè disparèt) pòsion nan majorite-a ki fè plis bri (i.e. revolte kont etablisman) pou yo ka kontinie kenbe pouvwa.  Lòt rezilta se sa, pafwa, majorite-a ka reyisi nan opozision yo kont minorite-a; souvan majorite sa dechouke, touye, patikilie enpòtan pèsòn pami elite yo diran tranzision an.  Sa se yon gouvènman sou egwi!  Toupandan moun sa yo pa chache yon fason pou yo debouye yo, trouve yon solision tou de pati kapab tolere, fòme yon demokrasi, ak chak revolision, y'ap kontinie touye len ak lòt pou jis kan yo elimine len ak lòt.

Kategori:Politik

eo:Oligarkio
es:Oligarquía

li:Oligarchie

'''Oligarchy''' (Greek , ''Oligarkhía'') is a elite segment of society (whether distinguished by wealth, family, military powers or spiritual hegemony). The word ''oligarchy'' is translated into "rule by few." Compare with autocracy (rule by one person) and democracy (rule by the people).

==Oligarchy, aristocracy, and plutocracy==
Historically, many oligarchies openly gave the political power to a minority group, sometimes arguing that this was an economic means. Although Aristotle pioneered the use of the term as a synonym for rule by the rich, for which the exact term is plutocracy, oligarchy is not always a rule by wealth, as oligarchs can simply be a privileged group.

==Oligarchy ''vs.'' monarchy==
Early English King English constitutional monarchy.

Oligarchies may also evolve into more European monarchies established during the late Middle Ages began in this way.

==Examples of oligarchies==

Examples include Directory, and the race. After the Second Boer War, a tacit agreement was reached between English- and Afrikaans-speaking whites. Together, they made up about twenty percent of the population, but this small percentage ruled the vast native population. Whites had access to virtually all the educational and trade opportunities, and they proceeded to deny this to the black majority even further than before. Although this process had been going on since the mid-18th century, after 1948 it became official government policy and became known worldwide as apartheid. This lasted until the arrival of democracy in South Africa in 1994, punctuated by the transition to a democratically-elected government dominated by the black majority.

oligarchs, who gained great wealth after the fall of corruption.

Capitalism as a social system is sometimes described as an oligarchy. Critics argue that in a capitalist society, power - economic, cultural and political - rests in the hands of the capitalist class. Communist states have also been seen as oligarchies, being ruled by a class with special privileges, the nomenklatura.

The concept of an "oligarchic democracy" is one which some scholars attribute to Ancient Rome and the United States. Marxist Ellen Meiksins Wood writes, that it "conveys a truth about U.S. politics every bit as telling as its application to ancient Rome. It is no accident that the Founding Fathers of the U.S. Republic looked to Roman models for inspiration in making the Federalist case, adopting Roman names as pseudonyms and conceiving of themselves as latterday Catos, forming a natural aristocracy of republican virtue. (Americans today still have a representative body called the Senate, and their republic is still watched over by the Roman eagle.) Faced with the distasteful specter of democracy, they sought ways to redefine that unpalatable concept to accommodate aristocratic rule, producing a hybrid, "representative democracy," which was clearly meant to achieve an effect similar to the ancient Roman idea of the "mixed constitution," in fact, an "oligarchic 'democracy."'<ref> See Monthly Review, July-August, 1989. </ref> However, the constitution and state laws have since been modified, with the removal of the original property requirements for voting, as well as giving the vote to women and blacks.[http://www.infoplease.com/timelines/voting.html]

== The Iron Law of Oligarchy ==
Some authors, such as elite impose strict limits on what constitutes an 'acceptable' and 'respectable' political position, and politicians' careers depend heavily on unelected economic and media elites.

The historian Spencer R. Weart in his book ''Never at War'' argues that oligarchies rarely make war with one another.