{{Infobox Person
| name   = E. Roland Harriman
| image     = no image
| image_size     = no image
| caption  = no image
| birth_date  = December 24, 1895
| birth_place = New York City
| death_date  = February 16, 1978
| death_place = Arden, New York
| occupation     = Financier, Philanthropist
| spouse         = Gladys C. C. Fries
| parents        = Edward Henry Harriman and Mary Williamson Averell
| children       = two
}}

'''E. Roland Harriman''' (born '''Edward Roland Noel Harriman''' on December 24 1895 in New York City - died on February 16 1978 in Arden, New York) was a financier and philanthropist. For those who were very close to him, his nickname 
was "Bunny".

He was the youngest of five surviving children of Mary Williamson Averell and Edward Henry Harriman, a financier and executive of the Union Pacific Railroad and the Southern Pacific Railroad. Among his siblings was W. Averell Harriman, the financier and government official, four years his senior. Edward H. Harriman's estate was substantial, variously estimated between $70 million and $100 million upon his death in 1909. 

Harriman was educated at Groton School, from which he graduated in 1913, and Yale University (B.A., 1917), where he was a member of Psi Upsilon fraternity and a member of Skull & Bones with his classmate and friend Prescott Bush. He married Gladys C. C. Fries on April 12, 1917, and they had two children. 

During World War I, Harriman served for ten months as an inspector with the rank of lieutenant in the United States Army Ordnance Department. Stricken with pneumonia and influenza, he was honorably discharged in January 1919. After regaining his health in California, he joined the Merchants Shipbuilding Corporation that November, a firm in which his brother Averell had an interest. 

In 1922, Harriman joined W. A. Harriman Company, investment bankers in New York City, and the following year, he became vice-president. In 1927 the two brothers formed the banking firm '''Harriman Brothers and Company'''.  In 1931 the firm was merged with Brown Bros. & Co., with Roland as vice-president. Headquartered on Wall Street, Brown Brothers Harriman started with nine partners and about two hundred employees.  The firm performed specialized banking services for customers, mainly medium-sized corporations; it was not a member of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.

In 1968, Harriman and three other senior partners at Brown Brothers (Robert A. Lovett, secretary of defense under President Harry Truman; Prescott Bush, former senator from Connecticut; and Knight Woolley -- all Yale men), moved "upstairs," literally and figuratively, to make way for the younger partners, one of whom was Robert Roosa, former undersecretary of the Treasury. 

In 1975, a few years prior to Harriman's death, there were twenty-nine partners and approximately one thousand employees. 

'''Edward Roland Noel Harriman''', né le 24 décembre 1895 à Union Pacific Railroad et du Southern Pacific Railroad. Parmi ses frères, W. Averell Harriman, financier et politique, de quatre ans son aîné. Le patrimoine de Edward H. Harriman était substantiel, estimé entre 70 et 100 millions de dollars à sa mort en 1909.

Harriman étudia à Groton School, où il fut diplômé en 1913 puis à Yale en 1917, où il était ami et membre de Skull & Bones avec son camarade de classe Prescott Bush. Il épousa Gladys C. C. Fries le 12 avril 1917 et en eut 2 enfants.

Durant la Première guerre mondiale, Harriman servit 10 mois en tant qu'inspecteur avec rang de lieutenant dans le United States Army Ordnance Department. Frappé par la pneumonie et la grippe, il fut honorablement déchargé en janvier 1919. Après avoir retrouvé sa santé en Californie, il se joint à la Merchants Shipbuilding Corporation en novembre, une entreprise dont son frère Averell était actionnaire.

En 1922, Harriman se joint à la W. A. Harriman Company, une banque d'investissement à New York, et l'année suivante, il en devient vice-president. En 1927, les deux frères s'associent dans une banque Harriman Brothers and Company, et en 1931 elle fusionne avec la Brown Bros. & Co., avec Roland comme vice-president. Siégeant à Wall Street, Brown Brothers Harriman commencent avec neuf associés et 200 employés. L'entreprise se spécialise dans les services bancaires pour les clients particuliers, surtout pour les classes moyennes ; il n'était pas membre du Federal Reserve System ou de la Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.