'''Det mosaiske Troessamfund''' er en af tre godkendte og anerkendte jødiske menigheder i Danmark. Siden 1969 er der ikke anerkendt nogen trossamfund i Danmark. I dag kan trossamfund søge Kirkeministeriet om godkendelse, hvilket giver en række privilegier og muligheder, men ikke samme muligheder som anerkendte trossamfund har.

Det Mosaiske trossamfund er anerkendt i henhold til kgl. resoulution fra 1682

De jødiske menigheder Machsike Hadas og Shir Hatzafon - Progressiv Jødedom i Danmark - er godkendte trossamfund (kilde: Kirkeministeriets hjemmeside [http://www.km.dk/trossamfundliste.html#1507]).

== Det jødiske samfund i Danmark ==
Der har levet jøder i Danmark i mere end 300 år. Jøderne har aktiv deltaget i dansk kulturliv, videnskab og erhvervsliv.

''Det mosaiske Troessamfund'' er et statsanerkendt trossamfund, som tæller ca. 2400 medlemmer. Der skønnes at være 6-7000 jøder i Danmark, af hvilke langt de fleste bor i hovedstadsområdet.

''Det mosaiske Troessamfund''s officielle religiøse linie er den religiøst til sekulært, kan trossamfundet betegnes som en enhedsmenighed, hvor alle opfattelser accepteres.

The Jewish community of Denmark constitutes a small minority with a known history back to the 17th century.

==Origins==

Medieval Danish art contains depictions of Jews - visible wearing pointed hats - but there is no evidence any Jews actually lived in Denmark during that time. With the conclusion of the Danish Reformation in 1536, Jews were prohibited entry into Denmark. 

The first known settlement on Danish territory was based on a royal dispensation. When the industrious Christian IV founded Frederik III to give general leave for Sephardic Jews to reside in Denmark for purposes of conducting trade. Although this was limited to Sephardim, a number of Ashkenazim were granted letters of safe passage and settled in the kingdom in the coming years.

Of special note is perhaps the story of Gabriel Milan, who converted to Christianity and became governor of the Danish West Indies in 1684, only to be executed in 1689 for corruption and abuse of office.

==Establishment of permanent communities==

Following the Thirty Years' War, which cost Denmark many of its possessions and created a fiscal crisis for the Danish crown, Frederik III proclaimed an absolute monarchy in Denmark. To improve trade, the king opened the door to greater immigration. The first Jewish community was founded in the newly established town of Fredericia in 1682, and in 1684 an Ashkenazi community was founded in Copenhagen.

By 1780, there were approximately 1600 Jews in Denmark, though all were admitted by special permission granted only on the basis of personal wealth. They were subject to a number of discriminatory restrictions of both social and economic character, and for a brief period in 1782 they were forced to attend Lutheran services. But they were not required to live in ghettos and had a significant degree of self-governance. Judging from art and writings from the time (particularly by the Danish-Norwegian playwright Ludvig Holberg), these early communities set themselves apart.

==Integration into Danish life==

As the Jewish enlightenment reached Denmark in the late 18th century, the king instituted a number of reforms to facilitate integration of Danish subjects into the larger Danish society. Jews were allowed to join guilds, study at the university, buy real estate, and establish schools.

The events in Norway resulted in a constitutional ban on Jews entering Norway). Still, there were severe antisemitic riots in Denmark in 1819 that were allowed to run their course for several months, though without any known fatalities. 

On the other hand, the early 19th century saw a flourishing of Danish-Jewish cultural life. The central synagogue in Denmark was built as a landmark building, designed by the architect G.F. Hetsch. A number of Jewish cultural personalities, among them the art benefactor and editor Mendel Levin Nathanson, the writer Meir Aron Goldschmidt, and founder of Politiken, Edvard Brandes; his brother literary critic Georg Brandes (who had a strong influence on Norwegian playwright Henrik Ibsen), Henri Nathansen, and others rose to prominence in the Danish cultural landscape.