{{Infobox VG
| title = Clive Barker’s Jericho
| image = 256px
| developer = Mercury Steam
| publisher = Codemasters
| designer = Joe Falke
| engine = Proprietary game engine
| released = <br><ref name="jerichodate"></ref>
| genre = Action<br>Horror<br>First-person Shooter<br>Tactical shooter
| modes = Single-player
| ratings = BBFC: 18<br />ESRB: M <br />PEGI: 18+<br />USK: 18 (rating rejected)
| platforms = Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 3, Xbox 360
| requirements =  '''Minimum Specification:'''
* Windows XP / Vista
* CPU: Pentium 2.4 GHz or Athlon XP 2400+
* RAM: 1 GB
* Graphics Card: GeForce 6600 / Radeon X1600
* DirectX 9 Compatible Sound Card
* 6 GB Hard Drive Space
* 2x DVD-ROM Drive
'''Recommended:'''
* Windows XP / Vista
* CPU: Intel Core 2 Duo or Athlon 64 X2
* RAM: 1 GB
* Graphics Card: GeForce 8800 or Radeon X1950 XTX
* Creative Sound Blaster X-Fi Sound Card
* 6 GB Hard Drive Space
* 2x DVD-ROM Drive |
| input = Keyboard, Mouse
}}

'''''Clive Barker’s Jericho''''' is a horror-themed PC, Steam.<ref name="jerichodate"></ref>

A demo for the game was released for the PC on September 26, 2007.<ref name="jerichodemo"></ref> The Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 demos were made available on the Xbox Live Marketplace and the PlayStation Store on September 27, 2007. 

The style of the letter "R" in the title is a reference to the R Rotunda.

== Premise == 
Certain  Apocryphal and  Gnostic texts speak of a being created by creation of Abyss to be forever forsaken, forgotten and unloved. God then started anew and went on to create mankind, giving the species two sexes, intellect, feelings, and love (not to mention a soul).

The Firstborn, too powerful for even God to keep from breaking into the mortal world, would make seven attempts to escape, each time taking back a piece of the earth to add to its domain and each time sent back to the Abyss. Fragments of time and space would form layers around this domain, linked to this world in the city Al Khali. These layers would entrap pieces of history within its walls, from the time of the ancient Sumerians to World War II. Over time, other great conquerors and civilizations would arrive to claim the city as their own. Eventually, the city was forgotten and buried by the sands of time.

The Department of Occult Warfare was created in the 1930s to combat the supernatural and unexplained. Another purpose was to meet Nazi Germany's own research into the paranormal. One of their most brilliant members, Arnold Leach, was recruited in 1962. However, his unscrupulous behavior and nature would eventually have him expelled. He was marked for assassination, and although the operation appeared to be successful, it seems that he may have survived.

The Jericho Squad is sent to Al-Khali to prevent Leach from opening the breach and unleashing the Firstborn upon mankind once again.<ref name="Jericho"></ref>

==Gameplay==
Jericho's core gameplay consists of leading the game's eponymous seven-man team, allowing control of all team members by jumping to each character during certain points in the game, through various environments that have been warped by the Firstborn while fighting off a variety of twisted creatures. The game also features several "survival events" where the player must press the corresponding buttons or keys shown on screen in order to successfully survive. Additionally, each team member has both a primary and a secondary attack, either in the form of an alternate fire such as a grenade launcher on a rifle, or a secondary weapon such as a knife or pistol that can be dual wielded. While the game is a first person shooter, the ability to control different members of one's squad adds a tactical element; players must determine which squad member is appropriate for each particular job. Not only does each squad member have different strengths and weaknesses, but they also each have a unique supernatural ability (or abilities in some cases). This allows the player freedom in choosing a playing style that suits them throughout much of the game. However, during certain instances, certain characters are unplayable.

The squad's supernatural abilities play a prominent role in the game. The character the player originally controls is a medic with the ability to fully heal fallen comrades that are close to death.  Other squad members have other powers, such as summoning a fire demon, slowing time, firing a guided bullet, and leeching life from enemies to add it to one's own.

==Plot==

The game begins in the present day, in the ruins of the ancient city of Al-Khali, where the team is ostensibly searching for a recon squad of Swiss guardsmen. However, the squad soon finds the guardsmen dead and their bodies horribly mutilated. They venture further in order to carry out their mission, Operation Godseal.  

In the past, every time the Firstborn tried to break into the mortal world, seven warrior priests would seal it away inside the Box (or ''Pyxis'' in Latin).  The Pyxis is the reality or realm that the Firstborn was forsaken to by God.  When the Firstborn is forced into the Pyxis, it takes a part of the earth with it, to add to its domain.  In doing so, it also takes the inhabitants of that place with it, sealing them along with the Firstborn inside the Pyxis with no possibility of escape.  

Normal rules of reality do not apply to those inside the Pyxis.  To those who now call the Pyxis home, every day is the same battle.  Time does not move, day and night do not apply, and neither does death.  Those who do die inside the Pyxis are then engulfed by flies and become whatever the Firstborn sees fit to serve it best.  

Upon entering the Pyxis, the time is still present day, though time stops once Jericho has entered.  The team must seek rips in the time rift called Breaches.  A Breach is a gateway into the past, to the time the Firstborn was sealed prior to the current time.  Before Jericho's attempt, during World War II, British soldiers closed the Breach and successfully detained the Firstborn.  Before them, the Romans had, and prior to that, the Sumerians originally sealed the Firstborn away after its first attempt at taking over the world. It was hinted by the British soldiers that another group of seven had tried before Jericho but after the British. Always referred to as a "sorry lot".  

Whilst attempting to enter the first Breach, Jericho is attacked by unknown creatures, and find that Arnold Leach, who was once part of Jericho, is now a twisted monster and is trying to open the seal so the Firstborn can take over the world.  The leader of Jericho, Captain Devin Ross, is killed by Leach before he can enter the Breach, forcing his soul to take refuge in Delgado's body.  Upon entering the first Breach, the members of Jericho find themselves in Al-Khali as it was during WWII, and discover that Ross can still interact with Jericho by possessing each of them.  They meet up with Blackwatch, an elite group of British soldiers who were the last successful lot to seal away the Firstborn, and are now trapped in their time. The Blackwatch squad explains to Jericho that the last person to open the void before Leach was a German commander named Hanne Lichthammer, and that she must be defeated before Jericho can continue deeper into the Pyxis. Jericho then captures Lichthammer, and Church ultimately kills her, thereby opening a Breach deeper into the Pyxis. And, after a farewell from the Blackwatch, Jericho enters the Breach.

Afterwards, the Jericho squad finds themselves in Al-Khali during the Crusades. Here they discover the story of Bishop Maltheus St. Claire who sent innocent children to Al-Khali (claiming that their innocence will shield them from Saladin's armies). The children were slaughtered by the Saracens and their souls became twisted and full of hate because of the effects of the Pyxis. Also, the squad meets a certain Crusader Knight, De Gray (one of the seven Crusaders that originally sealed the Breach in their time), who is deceived by Leach claiming he is Archangel Gabriel. The Jericho squad defeats Maltheus and the souls of the slaughtered children tear him apart. The children free themselves from their curse and Jericho advances further into the Pyxis.

This time they find themselves in the Roman period during which Al-Khali was a far Roman province. Its governor, Cassus Vicus, is a twisted sadist, glutton and a fan of all kinds of bacchanalias, most notably orgies and cannibalism. On the road to Vicus' residing place, the squad meets centurion Tertius Longinus (one of the seven Roman warriors that sealed the Breach). The crucified and tortured centurion gives them directions to Vicus. After a battle in a Colosseum-like arena and the defeat of Cassus Vicus himself, Jericho Squad proceeds deeper into the Pyxis.

The last time jump takes them to the age of the Sumerian Empire, when the original order of seven Sumerian priests, who first stopped the Firstborn, was founded. One of those priests, Antadurunnu, tells the squad that the remaining priests have been corrupted by the Firstborn because they spent millennia in the Pyxis and that they have to help him regain his body. The Jericho squad fights and defeats the corrupt priests and reassembles Antadurunnu's body. Antadurunnu then begins the ritual that will bind him and the Jericho squad to the Breach, effectively shutting it, like he has done many times before. But Delgado opposes such action because he claims that, after being trapped in the Pyxis (which is a "side effect" of shutting it), the squad will fall to madness or end up in an eternity in their personal Hell, like all the other Breach-shutters before them (the Blackwatch, the Crusaders, centurion Tertius Longinus and Antadurunnu and the Sumerian priests themselves). Father Rawlings opposes him, but Ross states that "Delgado could be right". Delgado then kills Antadurunnu ignoring the Sumerian's threats that everything he loves will be gone and replying that everything he loves is right here. The squad then jumps into the Breach and is taken to a location named Pyxis Prime where they face the Firstborn. It is revealed that he is actually the child that the squad had been encountering numerous times on their mission, and which had helped them progress, usually by letting Jones use his astral projection ability on him. Arnold Leach is also in Pyxis Prime, tied to a wall. Before the final battle, the Firstborn kills Cole (before she could tell the squad how to defeat him) and Jones by blasting them with magical bolts causing their bodies to explode. The Firstborn then battles the squad and uses their own magic against them. At the peak of the battle, Arnold Leach, who had managed to free himself in the meantime, betrays the Firstborn, grabbing him and flying with him into a tunnel of light, possibly destroying both the Firstborn and himself by doing so. The Jericho Squad (minus Cole and Jones) then attempt to flee Pyxis Prime by swimming away through a pool of water by which they came there and the game ends. During the credits a vast ocean is shown.This ending however, is extremely open-ended, more or less because of the (rumored) sequel.

==Sequel==
Rumours about a sequel to Jericho were confirmed when Clive Barker had announced his intention to make a sequel to the game. In an interview, Clive let slip that plot details include "an aircraft carrier in the middle of the ocean with exactly 666 children in its hold", and will reveal the fate of the remaining Jericho members, especially Ross, following the death of the Firstborn.

== Main Characters ==
left|thumb|300px|The game's Jericho squad (l-r): Simone Cole, Abbey Black (crouching), Xavier Jones, Frank Delgado, Billie Church and Paul Rawlings.

=== The Jericho Squad ===

'''Captain Devin Ross'''

Formerly extremely skeptical towards all paranormal and psychic phenomenon, Jericho Squad Leader and accomplished war veteran Devin Ross was transferred to the Department of Occult Warfare after his own psychic abilities manifested during a botched raid on a Taliban safe house several years previously. As a psychic healer, Ross is able to revive fallen teammates, provided he is able to maintain visual contact.  Near the start of the game he is killed by Arnold Leach, a former Jericho member turned demon, but his spirit lives on in the bodies of his teammates. (Voice Actor: Steven Blum)

'''Captain Xavier Jones'''

Little is known about Jones, and he seems to like it that way. Second in command, Xavier Jones is more of a bookworm than a fighting man, having spent most of his career at the DOW in an office before recently joining the combat division. He is skilled in astral projection and empathy, and the Jericho Squad look to him as some kind of enforcer, seen at one point after some team infighting, when he is ordered to "arrest that man."  He carries a Patrioteer which is an HKG36C assault rifle with an XM26 semi-automatic mounted shotgun.  During the game other beings have used him to translate their language to the Jericho squad. (Voice Actor: Jamieson Price)

'''Lt. Abigail Black'''

A telekinetic sniper, Black tends to keep to herself.  The only daughter of avid Alaskan-born outdoorsman and hunter, Abigail Black persevered through a childhood of poverty and abuse to become one of the top marksmen in the US Army. She carries a sniper rifle called Flash Thought which also has an under-barrel grenade launcher.  Her psychokinetic powers allow her to guide her bullets into multiple targets (Ghost Bullet). Her teammates pick on her somewhat due to her being a lesbian, with Delgado in particular making many jokes regarding her sexuality, but deep inside she has strong, repressed, romantic feelings for Xavier Jones. (Voice Actor: Cindy Robinson)

'''Sergeant Frank Delgado'''

Sgt. Frank Delgado is of Mestizo and Chickasaw descent, his powers owing to a life-long pursuit of alchemy and shamanic wisdom. Delgado has only one useful arm on a mission--his right is encased within a protective shell containing Ababinili, a parasitic flame spirit of which Delgado was able to summon and earn the cooperation of after offering his arm as a sacrifice. Accordingly, Delgado favors high-caliber firearms to compensate for his reduced dexterity.  He carries a 7.62-mm mini-gun fed by a continuous ammo strip (Hells Keeper) and a .50-calibre semi-automatic custom pistol with 6-round magazines (Pain). (Voice Actor: Armando Valdes-Kennedy)

'''Sergeant Wilhelmina 'Billie' Church'''

{{Infobox Computer- und Videospiel|
|Titel = Clive Barker’s Jericho
|Bild = 
|Entwickler = Mercury Steam
|Verleger = Codemasters
|Release = 26. Oktober 2007
|Plattform = PC, PS3, XBox 360
|Genre = Ego-Shooter
|Spielmodi = Einzelspieler
|Bedienung = Maus
|Systemminima = CPU: 2.4 GHz oder Athlon XP 2400+, RAM: 1 GB, GPU: GeForce 6600/Radeon X1600 oder vergleichbar, Direct X 9 Kompatible Soundkarte, HDD: 3930 MB, 8× DVD-ROM-Laufwerk, DirectX 9.0c
|Medien = 1 DVD-ROM, Blu-ray Disc, Steam
|Sprache = Deutsch, Englisch
|USK = 18
|PEGI = 18+
|Info = Horror-Shooter
}}
'''Clive Barker’s Jericho''', im Folgenden ''Jericho'', ist ein Ego-Shooter mit Horror- und Team-Elementen aus dem Jahr 2007. Das Spiel wurde von Mercury Steam entwickelt, den Vertrieb übernahmen Codemasters.

== Titel ==
Der Titel setzt sich aus dem Namen des bekannten britischen Horror-Schriftstellers Clive Barker, der die Hintergrundgeschichte des Spieles geschrieben hat, und dem Namen des Teams um das es im Spiel geht, ''Jericho'', zusammen.

== Hintergrund ==
''Jericho'' ist nach Undying das zweite interaktive Projekt des britischen Autors, Zeichners und Regisseurs Clive Barker. Die Ideen, die Barkers Fantasie entspringen, drehen sich oft um die Welt des Horrors.

== Story ==
Zum Anbeginn der Zeit erschuf Gott das "Erstgeborene".
Vor der Vollendung sieht er ein, dass er einen Fehler gemacht hat, da er aber das Erstgeborene nicht vernichten kann, verbannt er es in einen unendlichen Abgrund.
In diesem Abgrund wartet es, bis sich jemand, der nur töricht genug ist seinem Ruf zu folgen, daran macht, ihn zu befreien.
Merkwürdige Dinge zeichnen sich über der Stadt al-Khali ab, als ein Sonderkommando des DOW (Department Of Occult Warfare)
losgeschickt wird, um den Spalt, durch den der Erstgeborene in unsere Welt dringen will, zu sichern.
Auf ihrem Weg dorthin müssen sie sich allerlei Gefahren stellen, die meist übernatürlicher Natur sind.

== Gameplay ==
Der Spieler übernimmt die Rollen von sieben Protagonisten, die mit unterschiedlichen Waffen und Fähigkeiten ausgestattet sind.
Diese sieben Charaktere, teils weibliche, teils männliche können abwechselnd vom Spieler gesteuert werden. Die restlichen Spielfiguren verhalten sich nach der programmierten Künstlichen Intelligenz und den Anweisungen des Spielers.
Die im Spiel dargestellte Welt verfügt über eine düstere und beklemmende Atmosphäre.

Die Eingabe erfolgt bei den Konsolenfassungen über die jeweiligen Gamepads.
Bei der PC-Fassung kann diese entweder über Maus und Tastatur, oder ein Gamepad erfolgen.

Die deutsche Fassung weist in Bezug auf den Inhalt der Geschichte Unterschiede zu der englischen oder amerikanischen Version auf. Die graphische Gestaltung blieb unverändert und wurde nicht zensiert.
In den US- und UK-Versionen werden an einigen Stellen paranormale Divisionen der Deutschen erwähnt, die zur Führung des Zweiten Weltkriegs aufgestellt wurden; in der deutschen Version wurden hier Namensänderungen vorgenommen, wie beispielsweise auch in Return to Castle Wolfenstein.