'''Xiao Baoyin''' (蕭寶寅) (Chinese dynasty Xiao Yan, who was preparing by killing the imperial princes, Xiao Baoyin fled to rival Northern Wei and became an official and general in the Northern Wei government.  In 527, as Northern Wei was embroiled in agrarian rebellions, Xiao Baoyin rebelled and tried to reestablish Southern Qi, but was soon defeated and forced to flee to a rebel leader, Moqi Chounu (万俟醜奴), and he served under Moqi until both were captured in 530 by the paramount general Erzhu Rong's nephew Erzhu Tianguang.  He was forced to commit suicide.

== Early life ==
Xiao Baoyin was born in 487, during the reign of Xiao Luan was a cousin.  He was Xiao Luan's sixth son, and his mother was Xiao Luan's wife Liu Huiduan (劉惠端).  She also bore two older brothers of his, Xiao Baorong, but died in 489, when Xiao Baoyin was just two.  During Emperor Wu's reign, Xiao Luan carried the title of Marquess of Xichang and was a high level official.  After Emperor Wu's death in 493, Xiao Luan served as prime minister to Emperor Wu's grandson and successor Xiao Zhaoye, but in 494 killed the frivolous Xiao Zhaoye, briefly replacing Xiao Zhaoye with Xiao Zhaoye's brother Xiao Zhaowen before seizing the throne himself (as Emperor Ming).  He created his sons imperial princes, and Xiao Baoyin carried the title of Prince of Jian'an.

== During Xiao Baojuan's and Emperor He's reigns ==
Emperor Ming died in 498, and was succeeded by Xiao Baoyin's older brother Xiao Baojuan.  Xiao Baojuan was a violent ruler, but treated his brothers generally well, and Xiao Baoyin was given important official titles.  In Xiao Yan rebelled against Xiao Baojuan after Xiao Baojuan had killed Xiao Yan's brother, the general Xiao Yi (蕭懿), Xiao Yan and another rebel general, Xiao Yingzhou (蕭穎冑), declared Xiao Baoyin's younger brother Xiao Baorong emperor (as Emperor He) at Jiangling, plunging Southern Qi into civil war.  In 501, the general Zhang Xintai (張欣泰) tried to rebel against Xiao Baojuan at the capital Jiankang, and he seized Xiao Baoyin, preparing to declare him emperor.  However, Zhang was soon defeated, and Xiao Baojuan, believing Xiao Baoyin to be not involved in the plot, did not punish him.  Xiao Yan, however, won victory after victory, and soon put Jiankang under siege.

Around the new year 502, during Xiao Yan's siege of Jiankang, Xiao Baojuan's generals Wang Zhenguo (王珍國) and Zhang Ji (張稷), fearful that Xiao Baojuan would hold them responsible for not being able to lift the siege, assassinated him and offered the city to Xiao Yan.  Xiao Yan entered the city and assumed regent powers (although he made Xiao Zhaoye's mother Empress Dowager Wang Baoming titular regent), and as Xiao Yan had Empress Dowager Wang bestow on him the title of Duke of Jian'an, Xiao Baoyin's title was changed to Prince of Poyang.

Xiao Yan had his eyes on the throne, and while ostensibly preparing the capital to welcome Emperor He back as the emperor, was preparing to force Emperor He to yield the throne to him.  As part of his preparation, he began to execute Emperor He's brothers.  Xiao Baoyin's eunuch Yan Wenzhi (顏文智) and attendant Ma Gong (麻拱) therefore plotted to try to save the 15-year-old prince's life.  They prepared for a boat on the Yangtze River, and then dug a hole on the wall during the middle of the night, to allow Xiao Baoyin to escape despite guards that Xiao Yan had put around his mansion.  After hiding and traveling, Xiao Baoyin eventually reached the border city of Shouyang (壽陽, in modern Lu'an, Anhui), which Northern Wei had captured from Southern Qi in 500.  Emperor Xuanwu of Northern Wei welcomed Xiao Baoyin as an honored guest, and after Xiao Yan seized the throne from Emperor He later in 502 (establishing Liang Dynasty as its Emperor Wu), considered using Xiao Baoyin as a tool to conquer Liang.  Publicly, Liang declared that Xiao Baoyin had been caught plotting treason and had been executed.

== Service as Northern Wei official and general ==
Emperor Xuanwu favored Xiao Baoyin for his brotherly piety in mourning Xiao Baojuan, and in spring 503, after Xiao Baoyin had prostrated himself for several days before Emperor Xuanwu's palace to beg for an attack against Liang, Emepror Xuanwu started plans of attacking Liang.  As part of the plan, Xiao Baoyin was given an army and given the dual titles of Duke of Danyang and Prince of Qi, with an eye toward having him conquer Liang and reestablish Southern Qi as Northern Wei's vassal.  For this reason, Emperor Xuanwu permitted Xiao Baoyin to gather strategists and generals about himself, which was usually not permitted for imperial subjects.  He also gave his sister the Princess Nanyang to Xiao Baoyin in marriage.

Xiao Baoyin appeared to be a capable general, and during the reigns of Emperor Xuanwu and Emperor Xuanwu's son Emperor Xiaoming, he rotated through a number of key governmental offices, and while he was temporarily stripped of his titles in 507 after he and another major general, Yuan Ying (元英) the Prince of Zhongshan, suffered a major defeat at the hands of the Liang general Wei Rui (韋叡), his titles were soon restored.  As Northern Wei's attacks on Liang repeatedly fizzled, however, there appeared to be little chance for him to reestablish Southern Qi.  In 511, when Northern Wei forces suffered another crushing defeat, he was described to be the only general who was able to keep his army undamaged.  In 516, he participated in the prevention of a Liang attack on Shouyang.  While on that campaign, Liang's Emperor Wu wrote him a personal letter, promising that if he defected from Northern Wei, he would be given the border provinces as well as his surviving relatives.  Xiao Baoyin refused and turned the letter over to Emperor Xiaoming's administration.

'''萧宝夤'''（字智亮，是齐明帝萧鸾的第六子，齐东昏侯萧宝卷的同母弟。萧衍（后来的梁武帝）攻克建康后不久，他逃奔到并被北魏收容。不过他一直不忘复兴齐国。河北起义时，他奉命到关中讨平莫折大提、莫折念生在河西的反叛。527年，他乘机控制长安和派人杀死了他认为朝廷派来监视的关右大使郦道元和他的家人后，自称齐帝，大赦，改年号隆緒元年。尚书仆射行台长孙稚奉命讨平他，不敌，投靠了万俟丑奴。530年，尔朱天光派遣贺拔岳等在安定打败万俟丑奴，生擒丑奴、萧宝夤，一并送到洛阳斩首。宝夤臨刑前“夷然自持，了不憂懼”。

萧宝夤娶南阳长公主；他们有三个儿子。
:长子萧烈，娶建德公主，成为驸马都尉。他和父亲萧宝夤一同被斩首。
:次子萧权，在一次射箭遊戏中被弟弟萧凯射中而死。
:幼子萧凯，娶长孙稚的女儿。魏书说她不守规矩，南阳长公主多次责罚她。萧凯怀恨在心，妻子乘机煽风点火。东魏天平年间（534年-537年），萧凯派奴婢想杀死母亲南阳长公主，失败，萧凯和妻子一同被杀。

==资料来源==
*魏书