'''الإقتصاد السياسي الماركسي''' هو أحد أركان الماركسية الثلاثة، و كتبه كارل ماركس نتيجة النقد و التأثر بالاقتصاد السياسي الانجليزي، و لا سيما ادم سميث و كان من أهم اعمال ماركس كتاب رأس المال ، حيث يقوم بدراسة التطور الاقتصادي و تطوراته عبر منظور المنطق الجدلي، و يعتبر ماركس ان كل تطور في العلاقات الاقتصادية يخضع لقوانين الدياليكتيك، معطياً مثل وحدة صراع المتناقضات في بيئة الاقطاعي و الفلاح، التي تستمر لبدأ مفعول تحول الكم إلى كيف بالثورة البرجوازية، و من ثم يتم نفي النفي ليظهر لاحقا العامل و رب العمل. و يعتبر الاقتصاد السياسي أهم ما كتبه كارل ماركس في حياته، و رغم أن الدول العظمى تعتمد تحليل ماركس للأزمات الإقتصادية، إلا أن الإقتصاد السياسي الماركسي لم يطبق الإ في الدول الشيوعية، و يبقى الإقتصاد السياسي الماركسي إحدى المواد التي تدرس بالجامعات، علماً بأن الولايات المتحدة الأمريكية، إثر الأزمات الإقتصادية في بداية القرن العشرين، إتبعت الكينزية لحل المشاكلات الإقتصادية.

تصنيف:ماركسية
تصنيف:اقتصاد سياسي ماركسي

 
es:Economía marxista

:''Note: ''Marxian'' economics is not restricted to ''Marxist'' economics, as it includes the economic thought of those inspired by Marx's works who do not identify with "Marxism" as a political ideology.''

'''Marxian economics''' refers to a body of economic thought stemming from the work of Karl Marx. 

The adherents of Marxian economics, particularly in academia, distinguish it from proletarian revolution.<ref>{{cite web
  | title = The Neo-Marxian Schools
  | publisher = The New School
  | url = http://cepa.newschool.edu/het/schools/neomarx.htm
  | accessdate = 2007-08-23 }}</ref><ref>{{cite web
  | last = Munro
  | first = John
  | title = Some Basic Principles of Marxian Economics
  | publisher = University of Toronto
  | url = http://www.chass.utoronto.ca/~munro5/MARXECON.htm
  | accessdate = 2007-08-23 }}</ref> It does not lean entirely upon the work of Marx and other widely known Marxists (Lenin, Trotsky, etc.), but may draw from a range of Marxist and non-Marxist sources. His work is seen as the basis for a viable analytic framework and an alternative to more conventional neoclassical economics.

== Marx and classical economics ==
Marx's economics took as its starting point the work of the best-known economists of his day, the British classical economists. Among these economists were Adam Smith, Thomas Malthus, and David Ricardo. 

Smith, in ''The Wealth of Nations'', argued that the most important characteristic of a market economy was that it permitted a rapid growth in productive abilities. Smith claimed that a growing market stimulated a greater "division of labor" (i.e., specialization of businesses and/or workers) and this, in turn, led to greater productivity. Although Smith generally said little about laborers, he did note that an increased division of labor could at some point cause harm to those whose jobs became narrower and narrower as the division of labor expanded.

Marx followed Smith by claiming that the most important (and perhaps only) beneficial economic consequence of capitalism was a rapid growth in productivity abilities. Marx also expanded greatly on the notion that laborers could come to harm as capitalism became more productive.

Additionally, in ''Theories of Surplus Value'', Marx noted, "We see the great advance made by Adam Smith beyond the Physiocrats in the analysis of surplus-value and hence of capital.  In their view, it is only one definite kind of concrete labour—agricultural labour —that creates surplus-value....But to Adam Smith, it is general social labour—no matter in what use-values it manifests itself—the mere quantity of necessary labour, which creates value.  Surplus-value, whether it takes the form of profit, rent, or the secondary form of interest, is nothing but a part of this labour, appropriated by the owners of the material conditions of labour in the exchange with living labour."
 
Malthus' claim, in "An Essay on the Principle of Population", that population growth was the primary cause of subsistence level wages for laborers provoked Marx to develop an alternative theory of wage determination. Whereas Malthus presented an ahistorical theory of population growth, Marx offered a theory of how a relative surplus population in capitalism tended to push wages to subsistence levels. Marx saw this relative surplus population as coming from economic causes and not from biological causes (as in Malthus). This economic-based theory of surplus population is often labeled as Marx's theory of the reserve army of labour. 

Ricardo developed a theory of distribution within capitalism, that is, a theory of how the output of society is distributed to classes within society. The most mature version of his theory, presented in On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation, was based on a labor theory of value in which the value of any produced object is equal to the labor embodied in the objected. (Adam Smith also presented a labor theory of value but it was only incompletely realized.) Also notable in Ricardo's economic theory was that profit was a deduction from society's output and that wages and profit were inversely related: an increase in profit came at the expense of a reduction in wages. 

Marx built much of the formal economic analysis found in ''Capital'' on Ricardo's theory of the economy.

==Marx's economic theories==
Marx's major work on political economy was ''Capital: A Critique of Political Economy'' (better known by the German title ''Das Kapital''), a three-volume work, of which only the first volume was published in his lifetime (the others were produced by Engels from Marx's notes). Marx wrote other treatises on economics: ''Critique of Political Economy,'' one of his early works, was mostly incorporated into ''Capital'', especially the beginning of Volume I.  Marx's notes made in preparing to write ''Capital'' were published years later under the title ''Grundrisse.'' 

Marx begins his analysis of capitalism with an analysis of the commodity.  The first sentence of ''Capital, Volume I'' states: "The wealth of those societies in which the capitalist mode of production prevails, presents itself as 'an immense accumulation of commodities,' its unit being a single commodity."  

Under the labor theory of value, the direct value of a commodity stems solely from the '''socially necessary labour time''' invested in it. But commodities also have a '''use value''' (that is, the direct utility gained from an item) and an '''exchange value''' (roughly equivalent to its market price, though Marxian economics would measure it in labour time). For example, the use value of a carrot lies in eating it and no longer being hungry, while its exchange value might be found in the quantity of gold (whose true value also lies in the labour which extracted it) which it could be sold for.

However, capitalists do not pay workers the full value of the commodities they produce. The gap between the value a worker produces and his or her wages are a form of unpaid labour, known as '''surplus value'''.

Moreover, Marx notes that markets tend to obscure the social relationships and processes of production, a phenomenon he termed '''commodity fetishism'''. Consumers see a commodity only in market terms. In looking to obtain something as private property, they consider only its exchange value, rather than its labour value.

== Criticisms ==

V. K. Dmitriev, writing in 1898,<ref> V. K. Dmitriev, 1974 (1898), ''Economic Essays on Value, Competition and Utility''. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press</ref> Ladislaus von Bortkiewicz, writing in 1906-07,<ref> Ladislaus von Bortkiewicz, 1952 (1906–1907), "Value and Price in the Marxian System", ''International Economic Papers'' 2, 5–60; Ladislaus von Bortkiewicz, 1984 (1907), "On the Correction of Marx’s Fundamental Theoretical Construction in the Third Volume of ''Capital''". In Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk 1984 (1896), ''Karl Marx and the Close of his System'', Philadelphia: Orion Editions.</ref> and subsequent critics have alleged that Marx's value theory and law of the tendency of the rate of profit to fall are internally inconsistent. In other words, the critics allege that Marx drew conclusions that actually do not follow from his theoretical premises. Once these alleged errors are corrected, his conclusion that aggregate price and profit are determined by, and equal to, aggregate value and surplus value no longer holds true. This result calls into question his theory that the exploitation of workers is the sole source of profit.<ref>M. C. Howard and J. E. King. (1992) A History of Marxian Economics: Volume II, 1929–1990, chapter 12, sect. III. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press.</ref> Likewise, Marx's law of the tendency of the rate of profit to fall says that labor-saving technological changes tend to lower the economy-wide rate of profit. However, the corrected version of this law &mdash; Okishio's theorem &mdash; implies that such technological changes ''tend to raise the rate of profit.''<ref>M. C. Howard and J. E. King. (1992) A History of Marxian Economics: Volume II, 1929–1990, chapter 7, sects. II-IV. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press.</ref>

The inconsistency allegations have been a prominent feature of Marxian economics and the debate surrounding it since the 1970s.<ref> See M. C. Howard and J. E. King, 1992, ''A History of Marxian Economics: Volume II, 1929–1990''. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press.</ref> Andrew Kliman argues that, since internally inconsistent theories cannot possibly be right, the inconsistency charges serve to legitimate the suppression of Marx's critique of political economy and current-day research based upon it, as well as the correction of Marx's alleged inconsistencies.<ref> Kliman states that "Marx’s value theory would be ''necessarily wrong'' if it were internally inconsistent. Internally inconsistent theories may be appealing, intuitively plausible and even obvious, and consistent with all available empirical evidence––but they cannot be right. It is necessary to reject them or correct them. Thus the alleged proofs of inconsistency trump all other considerations, disqualifying Marx’s theory at the starting gate. By doing so, they provide the principal justification for the suppression of this theory as well as the suppression of, and the denial of resources needed to carry out, present-day research based upon it. This greatly inhibits its further development. So does the very charge of inconsistency. What person of intellectual integrity would want to join a research program founded on (what she believes to be) a theory that is internally inconsistent and therefore false?" (Andrew Kliman, ''Reclaiming Marx's "Capital": A Refutation of the Myth of Inconsistency,'' Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2007, p. 3, emphasis in original).  The connection between the inconsistency allegations and the lack of study of Marx’s theories was argued further by John Cassidy ("The Return of Karl Marx," ''The New Yorker'', Oct. 20 & 27, 1997, p. 252):  "His mathematical model of the economy, which depended on the idea that labor is the source of all value, was riven with internal inconsistencies and is rarely studied these days."</ref> 