thumb|225px|right|Burren landscape

'''The Burren''' (, ''Boirinn'' is the modern form used by the Ordnance Survey) is a unique Ireland. The region measures approximately 250 square kilometres and is enclosed roughly within the circle comprised by the villages Ballyvaughan, Kinvara, Tubber, Corofin, Kilfenora and Lisdoonvarna, It is bounded by the Atlantic and Galway Bay on the west and north respectively. Strictly speaking the territory of the Burren or barony of Burren only contains the villages of Lisdoonvarna, Ballyvaughan, Fanore, Craggagh, New Quay/Burrin, Bealaclugga (Bellharbour) and Carron.

The definite article (making it "''the'' Burren") has only been added to the name in the last few decades, possibly by academics, as it had always been called ''Boireann'' in Irish and ''Burren'' in English.

==History==

Burren is rich with historical and archeological sites. There are more than 90 celtic high cross in the village of Kilfenora, and a number of ring forts - among them the triple ring fort Cahercommaun on the edge of an inland cliff, and the exceptionally well-preserved Caherconnell Stone Fort. Corcomroe Abbey is one of the area's main scenic attractions.

The territory of Burren was also called Corco Modhruadh Oirthearach ("eastern Corcomroe"), which is the north eastern portion of the shared territory, or ''túath'', of Corco Modhruadh, and  means "the people of Modhruadh" as well as "the territory of Modruadh". The diocese of Kilfenora, in which Burren is situated, is coextensive with the territory of Corco Modhruadh. In the annals, Burren was often called "Burren in Corco Modhruadh". Burren was ruled by the Ó Lochlainn clan, who styled themselves Kings of Burren, up until the upheavals of the mid 1600s. The present day descendant of the last chief of the Ó Lochlainn clan resides in Ballyvaughan / ''Baile Uí Bheacháin''.

thumb|225px|right|Grikes and clints run along the [[limestone pavement]]

==Geography and scenery==
During counter guerilla operations in Burren in 1651-52, Ludlow stated "''It is a country where there is not enough water to drown a man, wood enough to hang one, nor earth enough to bury him...... and yet their cattle are very fat; for the grass growing in turfs of earth, of two or three foot square, that lie between the rocks, which are of limestone, is very sweet and nourishing''"  

The rolling hills of Burren are composed of Alpine plants side-by-side, due to the unusual environment. The blue flower of the rock-climbers. For potholers, there are a number of charted caves in the area. Doolin is a popular "base camp" for cavers, and is home to one of the two main cave-rescue stores of the Irish Cave Rescue Organisation.

The definitive guides to the caves of the Burren have been published by the University of Bristol Spelæological Society.

The area is also known for its long history of Traditional Irish Music. The "West Clare Style" of concertina playing performed by masters such as Chris Droney (Bealaclugga) and the music festival in Doolin are a draw for musicians from all over the world.

Il '''Burren''' (dal Clare, nella Repubblica d'Irlanda, compreso all'incirca tra i centri abitati di Ballyvaughan, Kinvarra, Gort, Corrofin, Kilfenora e Lisdoonvarna fino al Black Head Lighthouse, per un'area di circa 300 km².

800px|center

==Caratteristiche==

La regione del Burren copre l'1% del territorio Irlandese per un'estensione totale di circa 250 km quadrati. Nel sud-est del Burren il Governo Irlandese ha acquisito 1673 ettari di territorio adibendoli a parco e istituendo così il Parco Nazionale del Burren. 
Le colline dell'area sono formate da una pavimentazione calcarea frammentata da moltissime fessure lineari, chiamate ''grikes'', che formano quindi varie rocce isolate, chiamate invece ''clints''.

Oltre che per i suggestivi ed unici scenari che può offrire, il Burren è rinomato per l'incredibile flora presente fra i ''grikes'': è possibile trovare piante locali, ma anche addirittura mediterranee e alpine, a seconda delle zone e della forma delle rocce: il particolare fiore blu della genziana di primavera, pianta tipicamente alpina, è un simbolo spesso usato per contraddistinguere la regione.

Altra importante caratteristica del Burren è il formarsi di piccoli stagni temporanei che possono durare però tempi anche molto lunghi, chiamati ''turlough''.

==Luoghi d'interesse==