'''Adolf Ziegler''' (German painter and politician.
He was tasked by the Nazi Party to oversee the purging of "Degenerate art", made by most of the German modern artists. He was the favoured painter of Hitler.

==Life==
Born to an architect father and a family of architects on his mother’s side, Ziegler was always surrounded by artists. He studied at the Weimar Academy from 1910 under master of technique Max Döerner at the Munich Academy. However, the First World War interrupted his studies when he signed up to become a front-line officer. 
After the war, he settled in Munich and continued his studies at the Munich Academy in 1919, where he attends classes by art nouveau artist Angelo Jank.  He ultimately achieved the position of professor at the Expressionist artists such as Karl Schmidt-Rottluff. Writing to Rottluff, he forbade him from any artistic activity "professional or amateur".  

Already a member of the Nazi Party in the early 1920’s, he met Hitler in 1925 and became one of his advisors in artistic matters.  Hitler commissioned Ziegler to paint a memoriam portrait of his niece, Judgement of Paris'', which Hitler personally acquired some time later, hanging it in his residence at Munich - Hitler would later also hang Ziegler's [http://www.dhm.de/lemo/objekte/pict/625_1/index.html The Four Elements] at a residence in Munich.  It became an overnight sensation through frequent reproduction.  This painting was much liked, judging by the enormous numbers of postcards and reproductions of it sold. The National Socialist celebrations of the human figure without conflict or suffering were immensely popular. By this time, Ziegler had become the foremost official painter of the Third Reich and was awarded the Gold Badge, the highest party member recognition, of the NSDAP. 

Not much is known about his early works except that his early style exhibited modernist forms.  Exiled museum director naturalism’ of the racially pure figures left nothing to the imagination, earning him the disparaging nickname of ‘Meister des Deutschen Schamhaares' ("Reich Master of Pubic Hair)."

=== Role in the Degenerate Art Exhibition ===
thumb|[[Adolf Hitler and Adolf Ziegler visit the Degenerate Art exhibition, 1937.]]
Ziegler occupied several important administrative positions during the Third Reich.  He was appointed Senator of the Fine Arts at the Reich Chamber of Culture in 1935.  Propaganda Minister Goebbels later appointed him to the Presidential Council, then vice-president of the Reich Chamber of Art.  Finally, on December 1, 1936, he succeeded architect Eugen Hönig as president of the Chamber of Art, which then had 45,000 members.  Ziegler’s replacement of Hönig as president was a clear signal of the Reich’s growing distaste for nonconformity in the arts.

Ziegler headed a five-man commission that toured state collections in numerous cities, hastily seizing works they deemed degenerate.  The works were then rushed to Munich for installation in the narrow rooms of the Hofgarten arcade for display, including some 16,000 examples of expressionist, abstract, cubist and surrealist works of art. The paintings of such "degenerate" artists, including the works of Max Beckmann and Emil Nolde, were confiscated on Ziegler’s orders as head of the sluice commission.  Ziegler managed to organize the Exhibition of Degenerate Art in Munich in less than two weeks.  On July 19,1937, he opened the exhibition and condemned those museum directors from whose collections the works came and their tolerance of the decadent art.

During the Second World War, Ziegler was temporarily sent to a prison camp after he publicly expressed doubts about the viability of Hitler's campaign.  When Hitler was notified of Ziegler’s “defeatist” attitude, he ordered his arrest.  Ziegler was arrested by the Gestapo and imprisoned in the Dachau concentration camp for six weeks.  However, Hitler personally ordered that he be released from Dachau and be allowed to retire.  

Because his paintings were so closely associated with National Socialism, Ziegler was unable to successfully revive his career as an artist after the war.  He repeatedly petitioned for reappointment to the Academy of Fine Arts in Munich from 1955 to 1958, but was denied because the Academy determined that he initially received the position due to Hitler’s personal appointment.  There were some reports that Ziegler exhibited works in 1955 at the Ben Uri Gallery in London, but the gallery’s records indicate the artist was an “Adolf Zeigler,” a Jewish painter from London, not the German Ziegler. He also penned a response to Paul Ortwin Rave’s first-hand accounts of the Entartete Kunst exhibition in Munich, arguing with Rave’s assertions, but experts like Rave were not ready to analyze his standpoint objectively at that time.  Unable to revive his career, Ziegler lived quietly in the town of Varnhalt near Baden-Baden for the last years of his life. He died in September 1959, at the age of sixty-seven.

'''Adolf Ziegler''' (* Reichskammer der Bildenden Künste.

== Leben ==
Der Sohn eines Kunstakademie in Ersten Weltkrieg. Von 1924 bis 1933 arbeitete er als freischaffender Künstler.

Nach einer persönlichen Begegnung mit NSDAP ein, deren Funktionäre ihn zum „Sachberater für Bildende Kunst“ in der Reichsleitung der Partei ernannten.

Ab November 1933 lehrte Adolf Ziegler als Kunstakademie in Frauenakten und Porträts die Bewunderung Hitlers hervor und wurde schnell zum führenden Vertreter der offiziellen Parteikunst. Spötter bezeichneten ihn als „Reichsschamhaarmaler“.

Die Leistungen und das Engagement überzeugten seine Vorgesetzten, die ihn von November 1936 zum Präsidenten der Reichskammer der Bildenden Künste in der deutschen Museen und Galerien von „entarteter Kunst“, also Kunstwerken, die nicht der nationalsozialistischen Kunstauffassung entsprachen, beauftragt. Diese Aktion führte zur Beschlagnahmung von über 16.000 Werken. Mit diesen Bildern und Skulpturen wurde im Juni 1937 die von Adolf Ziegler geleitete Ausstellung „Entartete Kunst“ bestückt.