300px|right
right
'''얼스터'''(,  )는 지방 중 하나이다. 면적은 24,481 km²이고, 인구는 2백만명에 약간 못 미친다. 이 지방의 가장 큰 도시는 벨파스트로 약 50만명이 벨파스트와 그 인근에 거주한다.

얼스터는 영국이 아일랜드에 대한 식민정책을 수행할 때 신교도들을 다수 이주시켰던 지역으로, 전통적으로 신교도가 절대 다수를 차지해 왔다. 19세기에는 산업혁명으로 발전하는 영국과 함께 경제적 호황을 누렸는데, 이는 아일랜드의 다른 지역에서 농업과 목축업이 지배적이었던 것과는 대조적이다.

아일랜드 민족주의자들은 1912년에 아일랜드 자치법을 통과시키는 데 성공했는데, 얼스터 지역의 대다수는 이 법을 반대하면서 영국으로부터 직접 통치를 받고자 했다. 이들은 1919년에 아일랜드 독립전쟁이 시작된 후에도 영국에 속하고자 하는 합방주의(Unionism)를 고수하였으며, 1920년 아일랜드 정부법을 통해 북아일랜드 자치의회를 얻어내었다. 이후 1922년에는 남아일랜드에서 아일랜드 자유국이 수립되면서 아일랜드 섬은 분단되었다.

현재는 전체 아홉 주 중 여섯 주(아일랜드 공화국에 속한다.

주민 대부분이 영어를 사용한다. 도니골 주의 일부 주민과 외부에서 온 사람들이 아일랜드어를 쓴다. 세번 째로 많이 쓰이는 언어는 광둥어이다. 벨파스트에 사는 중국인 공동체 때문이다. 벨파스트는 인구 대비 가장 많은 중국 레스토랑이 있는 유럽 도시이다.

브리튼 제도에서 가장 큰 호수인 네이 호가 얼스터 동쪽에 위치하고 있다. 또한 제도에서 가장 긴 섀넌 강이 캐번 주에서 발원한다.

{{アイルランドの地方|
 province_name = Ulster|
 Irish_name    = Cúige Uladh|
 flag          = Flag of Ulster.svg|
 map           = IrelandUlster.png|
 area          = 24,481|
 population    = 1,931,981|
 census_yr     = 推定|
|}}
'''アルスター'''(英語:'''Ulster''', アイルランド語:'''Cúige Uladh''')はアイルランド島北東部に位置する地方。アーマー州、アントリム州、キャバン州、ダウン州、ティロン州、デリー州、ファーマナ州、ドニゴール州、モナガン州で構成される。
 
==地理==
アルスターの人口は200万人あまりで面積は24,481km2程度である。人口の半数はアントリム州とダウン州に住んでおり、最大の都市はアントリム州のベルファスト(''Béal Feirste'')である。 	 
アルスターを構成する9つの州 (Counties)のうち、アントリム州(''Antrim, Aontroim'')、アーマー州(''Armagh, Ard Mhacha'')、ダウン州(''Down, An Dún'')、ファーマナ州 (''Fermanagh, Fear Manach'')、デリー州(''Londonderry, Doire'')およびティロン州(''Tyrone, Tír Eoghain'')はイギリス統治下の北アイルランドに属しており、残りの3州はアイルランド共和国の施政下にある。北アイルランドのユニオニストには北アイルランドのことをアルスターと呼ぶ場合もあるが、歴史的に見て9つの州をあわせた地域をアルスターとするのが一般的である。 	 
	 
ほぼ全域で英語が話されているが、ドニゴール州にはアイルランド語を用いる中国人移民の増加により、広東語が3番目に話者が多い言語となっている。ベルファストの人口あたりの中華レストランの数はヨーロッパ一である。 	 
	 
アイルランドにおける最大の湖ネイ湖 が東部アルスターに存在する。最高点はダウン州のSlieve Donardで848mである。ドニゴールにはアイルランド島北端のマリン岬やヨーロッパで第二の高さを誇る断崖であるスリーヴ・リーグ があり観光名所となっている。アイルランド島最長の河川シャノン川はキャバン州に源流をもつ。東部アルスターにおける過去の火山活動によりアントリム高原やユネスコ世界遺産の一つであるジャイアンツ・コーズウェーが形成された。 	 
	 
<!-- 	 
- 	==History &amp; politics== 	 
- 	===Early History=== 	 
- 	Ulster (''Cu'ige Uladh'') is one of the four historic Irish provinces. Its early history extends further back than written records and is known only by legends such as the Earldom of Ulster - based around the modern counties of Antrim and Down. However, by the end of the 15th century, the Earldom had collapsed and Ulster was the only Irish province to be completely outside of English control. 	 
	 
In the 1600s Ulster functioned as the last redoubt of the traditional Gaelic way of life, and following the defeat of the Irish forces in the Nine Years War at the  Elizabeth I succeeded in subjugating Ulster and all of Ireland. The Gaelic leaders of Ulster, the decamped ''en masse'' in 1607 to Catholic Europe, finding their power under English suzerainty limited. This allowed the Crown to settle Ulster with more loyal English and Scottish planters, which began in earnest in 1610. 	 
- 		 
- 	===Plantations and Civil Wars=== 	 
- 	The Donegal, Tyrone, Armagh, Cavan, Londonderry and Fermanagh were included in the official plantation. However, the most extensive settlement in Ulster of English and Scots occurred in Catholic uprising of 1641. 	 
This rebellion, initially led by folk memory. In the ensuing wars (fought against the background of civil war in England, Scotland and Ireland), Ulster became a battleground between the Protestant settlers and the native Irish Catholics. In 1646, the Irish Catholic army under Benburb in county Tyrone, but failed to follow up their victory and the war lapsed into stalemate. The war in Ulster ended with the defeat of the Irish Catholic army at the battle of Scarrifholis in 1650 and the occupation of the province by the Cromwellian New Model Army. The atrocities committed by all sides in the war poisoned the relationship between Ulster's ethno-religious communities for generations afterwards. 	 
	 
Forty years later, in 1689, the conflict was re-fought in the Williamite war in Ireland, when Irish Catholics supported James II in the Glorious Revolution and Ulster Protestants backed William of Orange. The war provided Protestant loyalists with the iconic victories of the Siege of Derry, the Battle of the Boyne and the Battle of Aughrim, which are still commemorated today. The Williamite's victory in this war ensured British and Protestant supremecy in Ireland for over 100 years. Under the subsequent Protestant Ascendancy in Ireland, most of Ulster's population was excluded from power on religious grounds. Roman Catholics, descended from the indigenous Irish, and Presbyterians, mainly descended from Scottish planters, were both discriminated against by the Penal Laws, which gave full political rights only to Anglican Protestants, who were mostly descended from English settlers. In the 1690s, Scottish Presbyterians became a majority in Ulster, tens of thousands of them having emigrated there to escape a famine in Scotland. 	 
	 
===Republicanism, Rebellion and communal Strife=== 	 
Most of the eighteenth century saw a calming of sectarian tensions in Ulster. The economy of the province improved, as small producers exported linen and other goods. Belfast developed from a village into a bustling provincial town. However, this did not stop many thousands of Ulster people from emigrating to America in this period, where they became known as the "Scotch Irish." 	 
Political tensions resurfaced, albeit in a new form, towards the end of the century. In the 1790s, many Catholics and Presbyterians, in opposition to American and French republicans throughout the province. 	 
	 
In rebellion, and the gradual abolition of official religious discrimination after the Act of Union in 1800, Presbyterians came to identify more with the state and their Anglican neighbours, who perceived them as the lesser of two evils. 	 
	 
===Industrialisation, Home Rule and Partition=== 	 
In the 19th century, Ulster became the most prosperous province in Ireland, with the only large-scale industrialisation in the country. In the latter part of the century, RMS ''Titanic''. In the 19th century unionist'' (supporters of the Union with Britain, mostly Protestant) and ''nationalist'' (advocates of Irish independence, usually, though not only, Catholic). The origins of Northern Ireland's current politics lie in these late IRA to ensure the passing of the Home Rule Act 1914. 	 
	 
This armed stand-off was interupted by the outbreak of IRA was relatively quiet in Ulster, with the exception of the south Armagh area, where it was led by B-Specials, continued in Ulster, causing Michael Collins to order a boycott on northern produce, in protest at the attacks on the Catholic/Nationalist community. In 1922 six out of Ulster's nine counties became Northern Ireland and remained in the United Kingdom, whilst the rest became part of the Irish Free State. For the subsequent history of Ulster see History of Northern Ireland and History of the Republic of Ireland. 	 
	 
===Current Politics=== 	 
Although many of the Catholics of Northern Ireland have long opposed its existence, the Ulster Protestants of the three Republic of Ireland counties have assimilated well (although there was a good deal of migration into the other six counties following partition). Some sectarian tensions remain. The Orange Order freely organises in Donegal, Cavan and Monaghan, with a large 12 July march taking place in Rossknowlagh in Donegal annually with the full co-operation of the Garda Siocha'na and the local Catholic population. 	 
	 
Electorally, while voting in the six counties tends to follow religious lines, (the Taoisigh E'amon de Valera, Sean Lemass and Jack Lynch. 	 
	 
Eight of the eighteen MPs elected from the six counties of Northern Ireland are Catholics. One of the ten TDs elected from the three counties in the Republic is a Protestant. The southern parties have long ceased to base their selection of candidates purely on any religious criteria. For most of the twentieth century they chose at least one candidate from a Protestant background to attract the protestant vote but the disappearance of a block ''Protestant vote'' voting exclusively for a candidate on the basis of religion, with Protestant voters instead voting primarily for local candidates irrespective of religion, means that selection is now based largely on considerations of geography when electing TDs to Da'il E'ireann. 	 
	 
A nationwide prohibition introduced in the early 2000s that banned TDs from also being councillors, so as to separate local and national government more clearly, may discourage councillors who wish to remain on the council from seeking Da'il seats. It is unclear as of 2005 whether this may have an impact in discouraging the disproporionately high number of Protesant councillors, many of whom have long-held council seats passed on through the generations, which they may wish to hold but which they would have to give up if elected, from seeking to run from the Da'il. 	 
	 
The flag of Ulster was the basis for the official flag of Northern Ireland until the Stormont parliament was prorogued in 1973. 	 
	 
==Sport== 	 
In Ulster branch of the Celtic League, along with clubs from Leinster, Munster and Connacht). 	 
	 
Association football (soccer) is divided by the border since 1921: there is a Northern Ireland (international) team, but not an Ulster team; there are separate football championships (Irish League in Northern Ireland, League of Ireland in the rest of Ulster). Anomalously, Derry City F.C. has played in the League of Ireland since 1985. 	 
	 
In Gaelic games, Ulster counties compete with the other Irish counties in the All-Ireland Championships and National Leagues, as well as the All-Ireland inter-club championships. The whole province fields a team to play the other provinces in the Railway Cup. Gaelic football is by far the most popular of the Gaelic games in Ulster, with counties Derry, Antrim, and Down existing as 'isolated' Hurling counties. 	 
-->

==参照==
* アイルランドの地方
* 北アイルランド

*あるすたあ

eo:Ulster
es:Ulster