'''Malek Bennabi''' (or Malik Bin Nabi) (Arabic:مالك بن نبي) was a prominent Algerian thinker (1905 &ndash; 1973). He wrote about human society, particularly Muslim society with a focus on the reasons behind the fall of muslim society. 

The fall of ''Al-Muwaheed'' Dynasty that ruled North Africa including Spain from 1130 to 1269 marked a new devastating trend of undermining ideas. The lack of new ideas concurrently spurned the death of new civilisations. According to Malik Bennabi, with this, emerged what he coined – civilisational bankruptcy.

Algerian Malik Bennabi was born in Constantine. Highly regarded as the most eminent scholar, and thinker, of Post World War II Algeria, and one of the foremost intellectuals of the modern Muslim world. Educated in Paris and Algiers in
Engineering, he later based himself in Cairo, where he spent much of his time toiling through fields of History, Philosophy and Sociology.

In 1963, upon returning to Algeria, he witnessed modern science and technological civilisations unfold before his very eyes. This has spurred him to reflect on the question of culture in the early nineteenth century. His approach was simple; not parroting what had been discovered before his time, but rather, searching for what constitutes the essence of culture and the birth of civilisation.

From one of his works, “Les Conditions de la Renaissance” (1948), he defined culture as the mode of being and becoming of a people. This includes aesthetic, ethical, pragmatic, and technical values. When these contents have been clearly defined, only then could various formulations of ideas be born. The birth of new ideas equals to a
dynamic society that leads to the movement of vibrancy of a new civilisation.

In another book, “The Question of Culture” (1954), he said, the organisation of society, its life and movement, indeed, its deterioration and stagnation, all have a functional relation with the system of ideas found in that society. If that system were to change in one way or another, all other social characteristics would follow suit and adapt in the same direction. Ideas, as a whole, form an important part of the means of development in a given society. The various stages of development in such a society are indeed different forms of its intellectual developments. If one of those stages
corresponds to what is called “renaissance”, it will mean that society at that stage is enjoying a wonderful system of ideas; a system that can provide a suitable solution to each of the vital problems in that particular society. He added that
ideas influence the life of a given society in two different ways; either they are factors of growth of social life, or on the contrary, the role of factors of contagion, thus rendering social growth rather difficult or even impossible.

Malik Bennabi said that in the nineteenth century, the relations among nations were based on power for the position of a nation was dependent on the number of its factories, cannons, fleets and gold reserves. However, the twentieth century introduced a new development in which ideas were held in high esteem as national and international values. This development has not been strongly felt in many underdeveloped countries, for their inferiority complex has created a warped infatuation with the criteria of power that is based on objects.

Muslims living in an underdeveloped country will no doubt feel that they are inferior to people living in a developed country. They will gradually realise that what separates people is not geographical distance, but distance of another nature. As a result of this inferiority, Muslims ascribe this distance to the field of objects. They see their situation as an abomination caused by lack of weapons, aeroplanes and banks. Thus, their inferiority complex  will lose its social efficacy, leading only to pessimism on the psychological level. On the social level, it will lead to what we have elsewhere called takdis (heaping-up). To turn this feeling into an effective driving-force, Muslims should ascribe their
backwardness to the level of ideas, not to that of “objects”, for the development of the new world depends increasingly on ideational and intellectual criteria.

'''Malek Bennabi''' (en Constantine (Est de l'Nietzsche, Darwin, De Broglie, André Gide etc. Il était fortement imprégné de la culture arabo-musulmane et occidentale. On lui doit un concept sur la « colonisabilité » selon lequel, seule une société apte à être colonisée peut l'être, et ce notamment dans les pays musulmans, terme qu'il utilisera dans son livre ''l'Afro-asiatisme''.

== Œuvres de Bennabi ==
Malek Bennabi a à son actif plus d'une vingtaine d'ouvrages traitant de civilisation, de culture, d'idéologie, de problèmes de société ainsi que d'autres sujets tel ''le phénomène coranique'' et les raisons de la stagnation de la société musulmane en particulier. Par ses écrits, Malek Bennabi voulait éveiller les consciences musulmanes et relancer une renaissance de la société musulmane. Il n'a de cesse de critiquer vivement l'administration coloniale française par ses écrits et ses conférences. Il n'a jamais accepté la colonisation de l'Algerie par la France et le statut d'indigène octroyé par l'administration de l'epoque aux autochtones algériens. 

Il est probable que peu de gens aient vraiment saisi la portée de sa vision et sa pensée, notamment dans la société musulmane à propos de laquelle il dit dans son ouvrage ''vocation de l'Islam'' : 
:« ''La plus grave parmi les paralysies, celle qui détermine dans une certaine mesure les deux autres (sociale et intellectuelle), c'est la paralysie morale. Son origine est connue : "L'Renan et Lamennais dénonçaient en disant que l'islam "pourrait devenir une religion de stagnation et de régression".''»

Dans un autre ouvrage intitulé les "Grands Thèmes", Malek Bennabi parle des raisons de la stagnation de certaines société qu'il qualifie de primitives :
:« ''Quand une société primitive met des tabous autour de ses traditions, de ses convictions, de ses goûts, de ses usages, ce qui est risible là-dedans - à supposer qu'il y ait quelque chose de risible - ce n'est pas le tabou mais le vide culturel, l'inculture qu'elle défend, c'est-à-dire l'ensemble de causes qui maintiennent cette société en stagnation.''»

Ceci dit, il n'en demeure pas moins qu'il fut pris par certains de ces contemporains pour l'idéologue du système algérien. Révoquant le principe de laïcité pour les sociétés musulmanes, il considérait que l'histoire de l'Algérie commençait avec l'avènement de l'islam. C'est d'autant plus compromettant pour un fin penseur comme lui, sachant que saper des pans entiers de l'histoire antérieure à l'islam revient à dénier un droit d'exister à la population autochtone berbère, à sa culture, à sa langue, à ses valeurs...