250px|right|thumb|Eneja bježi iz Troje, slika Federica Baroccija iz 1598.

'''Eneja''', jedan od junaka u trojanskom ratu, bio je ― prema mitu ― sin Afrodite i pripadnik mlađe grane Ilijadi'' bog Askanija iz porušene Troje i o njihovim potonjim lutanjima. U grčkoj mitografiji se u 5. veku st. e. prvi put spominje Enejin odlazak na Zapad, ali nema dokaza da su ga Etruriji. Otprilike u 4. veku st. e. u grčkoj se mitografiji spominje grad Lavinij ''(Lavinium)'' i za njegovog osnivača imenuje Eneja. To je bio pokušaj Grka da se herojima grčkih mitova pripiše osnivanje njima poznatog Zapada. Izgleda da je u to vreme i grad Alba Longa, koji je zaista postojao, počeo tvrditi da je Eneja bio predak njegovih kraljeva. Uskoro je na mesto Albe Longe došao Rim, koji je razvio legendu o Eneji kao osnivaču rimskog naroda. Tako su Rimljani, podstaknuti nacionalnim ponosom, sopstvenu istoriju povezali sa istorijom grčkoga sveta. 

Priča o trojanskom poreklu Rima dobila je svoj konačni oblik u 3. veku st. e., kada je spojena sa drugom legendom o poreklu Rima, tj. sa legendom o Italiju došao polovinom 12. veka st. e., a Romul je osnovao Rim 753. godine st. e.), rimski su pisci popunili tu »prazninu« boravkom nekoliko generacija Enejinih potomaka u Albi Longi. U 3. veku st. e. ova je priča bila veoma raširena i dobro poznata. Venere (rimske Afrodite). Najpoznatiji prikaz legende o Eneji dao je u 1. veku st. e. Vergilije u epu ''Eneida'', koji je postao nacionalni ep Rimljana.

Category: Mitski junaci
Category: Grčka mitologija
Category: Rimska mitologija

eo:Eneo
es:Eneas

fur:Enee

thumb|right|280px|''Aeneas flees burning Troy'', [[Federico Barocci, thumb|right|280px|Aeneas carrying [[Anchises, black-figured 520-510 BC, Louvre (F 118)]]

''This article is about the Roman hero. For other uses, see Aeneas (disambiguation).''

In Greek: , ''Aineías'';  in English) was a Trojan hero, the son of prince Venus in Roman sources). His father was also the cousin of King Greek and Roman legend and history. Aeneas is a character in Homer's ''Iliad'', Quintus Smyrnaeus' ''Posthomerica'', and Shakespeare's ''Troilus and Cressida''.

==Mythology==
In the ''Iliad'', Aeneas is the leader of the Dardanians (allies of the Trojans), and a principal lieutenant of Hector, son of the Trojan king Priam. In the poem, Aeneas's mother Aphrodite frequently comes to his aid on the battlefield; he is also a favorite of Apollo. Aphrodite and Apollo rescue Aeneas from combat with Diomedes of Argos, who nearly kills him, and carry him away to Pergamos for healing. Even Poseidon, who normally favors the Greeks, comes to Aeneas's rescue when the latter falls under the assault of Achilles, noting that Aeneas, though from a junior branch of the royal family, is destined to become king of the Trojan people.

As seen in the first books of the sacked by the Greeks, Aeneas, after being commanded by the gods to flee, gathered a group, collectively known as the Romans. The Aeneads included Aeneas's trumpeter Misenus, his father Anchises, his friends Achates, Sergestus and Acmon, the healer Lapyx, the steady helmsman Palinurus, and his son Ascanius (also known as Iulus, Julus, or Ascanius Julius.) He carried with him the Lares and Penates, the statues of the household gods of Troy, and transplanted them to Italy.

thumb|left|Aeneas tells Dido about the fall of Troy, by Pierre-Narcisse Guérin.

(From here on, the Greek myths make room for the Roman mythology, so the Roman names of the gods will be used.)
After a brief, but fierce storm sent up against the group at Juno's request,and several failed attempts to found cities,  Aeneas and his fleet made landfall at Dido (also known as Elissa) , who proposed that the Trojans settle in her land and that she and Aeneas reign jointly over their peoples. Once again, this was in favour of Juno, who was told of the fact that her favorite city would eventually be defeated by the Trojans' descendants.  However, the messenger god Mercury was sent by  Jupiter and Venus to remind Aeneas of his journey and his purpose, thus compelling him to leave secretly and continue on his way. When Dido learned of this, she ordered her sister Anna to construct a pyre, she said, to get rid of Aeneas' possessions, left behind by him in his haste to leave.  Standing on it, Dido uttered a curse that would forever pit Carthage against Rome. She then committed suicide by stabbing herself with the same sword she gave Aeneas when they first met and then falling on the pyre. Anna reproached the mortally wounded Dido. Meanwhile, Juno, looking down on the tragedy and moved by Dido's plight, sent Iris to make Dido's passage to Hades quicker and less painful. When Aeneas later travelled to Hades, he called to her ghost but she neither spoke to nor acknowledged him.

The company stopped on the island of Sicily during the course of their journey. After the first trip, before the Trojans went to Carthage, Achaemenides, one of Odysseus' crew who had been left behind, traveled with them.  After visiting Carthage, the Trojans returned to Sicily where they were welcomed by Acestes, king of the region and son of the river Crinisus by a Dardanian woman.

Trojans and let them reorganize their life in Juno, who was aligned with King the Etruscans and Queen Amata of the Latins. Aeneas' forces prevailed. Turnus was killed and his people were captured. According to Livy, Aeneas was victorious but Latinus died in the war. Aeneas founded the city of Lavinium, named after his wife. He later welcomed Dido's sister, Anna Perenna, who then committed suicide after learning of Lavinia's jealousy. 
 
After his death, his mother, Venus asked Jupiter to make her son immortal. Jupiter agreed and the river god Venus anointed him with Ambrosia and Nectar, making him a god. Aeneas was recognized as the god Jupiter Indiges. Inspired by the work of James Frazer, some have posited that Aeneas was originally a life-death-rebirth deity.

==Family and legendary descendants==
Aeneas had an extensive family tree. His Julian family of Rome, most notably kings of Britain also trace their family through a grandson of Aeneas, Brutus.

In the recent trilogy of Troy novels written by the now deceased author David Gemmell, Aeneas is known both by this name and also the name Helikaon.

==Medieval literature==
In the Divine Comedy Dante sees the shade of Aeneas among other Roman worthies in the section of Limbo reserved for "virtuous pagans". 

*Roman d'Enéas