'''Louis III l'Aveugle''' est né à 28 juin 928 à Vienne (Isère). 

==Biographie==
===Origines===
Il est le fils de Boson V de Provence, et d'Ermengarde, fille de l'empereur d'Occident, Louis II le Jeune ; par sa mère il est un carolingien, lesquels se fondent dans les bosonides. 

===Roi de Provence et empereur d'Occident===
Il succède à son père en tant que roi de Provence de Richard le Justicier, frère de Boson. En mai 887 elle conduit son fils auprès de l'empereur Charles III le Gros pour qu'il l'adopte, ce qu'il fait.

En mai 889, elle se rend au nouveau roi Arnulf de Germanie pour faire acte de soumission.

En Valence, le roi d'Arles, roi de Provence et roi de Bourgogne Cisjurane.

En 894, le roi Louis fait acte de soumission au roi Arnulf de Germanie.

En 896, le roi Louis combat les Sarrasins qui continuent de dévaster la Provence.

En duc d'Aquitaine, comte de Lyon et de Mâcon.

En Hongrois, depuis plusieurs années ; à l'appel des grands féodaux pour qui il est le petit-fils de l'ancien empereur Bérenger de Frioul et se fait couronner roi d'Italie, le 12 octobre 900.

Le couronne impériale. 

En 902, l'ancien roi Bérenger de Frioul, lui aussi petit-fils d'un empereur d'Occident (Louis Ier le Pieux), revient avec des forces en nombre, et réussit à chasser d'Italie le nouvel empereur qui est obligé de se réfugier vers la Provence.

En 905 :
* Le roi Louis épouse Léon VI, plus connue sous le nom d'Anne de Macédoine
* Il est de retour en Italie à l'appel des grands féodaux, mais Bérenger Ier de Frioul, grâce à l'aide des troupes bavaroises, réussit à faire prisonnier Louis à Vérone et le 21 juillet 905 lui fait crever les yeux (d'où son surnom) et reprend la couronne royale d'Italie.

'''Louis the Blind''' (c. 880 &ndash; Boso, the usurper king of Provence, and Ermengard, a daughter of the Emperor Louis II. Through his father, he was a Bosonid, but through his mother, a Carolingian. 

He succeeded his father upon his death in January 887, though at that time, the kingdom of Provence was restricted to the environs of Richard the Justiciar, Arnulf, to make submission anew. The short work ''Visio Karoli Grossi'' may have been written shortly after Charles' death to support Louis's claim. If so, Louis must have had the support of Fulk the Venerable, Archbishop of Reims. On the other hand, the ''Visio'' may have been written later, circa 901, to celebrate (and support) Louis's imperial coronation. 

In 890, at Valence, a council of prelates and feudatories of the realm, elected Louis as King of Cisjurane Burgundy. In 894, Louis himself did homage to Arnulf. 

In 896, Louis waged war on the Saracens. Throughout his reign, he had to deal with the depredations of these Moslem invaders, who had landed and established a base at Fraxinet in 889.  

In 900, Louis, as the grandson and heir of the Emperor Louis II, was invited into Italy by various lords, including Berengar I. Louis thus marched his army across the Lombard capital, where, in the church of San Michele, he was crowned with the Iron Crown of Lombardy on 12 October. He travelled onwards to Rome, where, in 901, he was crowned Emperor by Pope Benedict IV. The next year (902), however, Berengar defeated Louis's armies and forced him to flee to Provence and promise never to return. 

In 905, Louis launched another attempt to invade Italy. He was again defeated by Berengar, with the aid of Hugh, Count of Arles, was the dominant figure in the territory. 

Louis returned to Vienne, his capital, and by 911, he had put most of the royal powers in the hands of Hugh. Hugh was made Margrave of Provence and moved the capital to Arles. As regent, Hugh married Louis's sister Willa. Louis lived out his days until his death in obscurity. 

==Marriages and heirs==