thumb|300px|right|サン・フアン・デ・ウルア
'''サン・フアン・デ・ウルア''' ('''San Juan de Ulúa''') は、メキシコのベラクルス港付近の島に建設された要塞である。この要塞はスペイン植民地時代の1565年に建設が始まり、後に数度の拡張を経て現在見られるような堅固な要塞になった。

1568年、スペイン海軍はサン・フアン・デ・ウルアの戦いにてジョン・ホーキンス率いるイギリス私掠船団を打ち破った。船団に参加していたフランシス・ドレークは命からがらイギリスに逃げ延びた。

メキシコ独立革命後、サン・フアン・デ・ウルアはヌエバ・エスパーニャに残ったスペイン最後の領土となった。1825年、要塞に残っていたスペイン軍は革命軍のミゲル・バラガン将軍に降伏し、スペインによるメキシコの植民地支配は終わりを告げた。

19世紀には主に政治犯を収容するための刑務所として使われ、多くの著名なメキシコの政治家が投獄された。

thumb|300px|right

'''San Juan de Ulúa''' is a large Veracruz, Spanish colonial era, starting its construction in castillianized name of Ulúa. In Nahuatl, Kahlúa means "House of the Acolhua people" (from kalli or calli, 'house' and Acolhua, an ethnic group from the Nahuatl family).

In 1569, Spanish Navy succeeded in trapping the English fleet of Sir John Hawkins, including the young Francis Drake, at San Juan de Ulúa; the English barely succeeded in making their escape, a humiliating experience which affected Drake's later career. 

Richard Hakluyt's book, The Principal Navigations, Voiages, Traffiques and Discoueries of the English Nation (1598–1600), claims Drake and Hawkins were on a private venture, peacefully trading with the local colonial Spaniards in violation of Spanish law, when a Spanish naval fleet arrived. Despite suspicion of treachery, they allowed the Spaniards to take shelter under truce, between San Juan de Ulúa island, on an otherwise open coastline. They were then attacked by surprise. In fact Drake and Hawkins were perfectly capable of raiding, which they had probably done elsewhere on that voyage, and the trade was in African captives. These had been taken earlier from West Africa. But it does seem that they were trading at the time. The only real doubt is whether the colonists were doing so in case worse things should happen.<ref>[http://www.nndb.com/people/186/000101880/? Sir John Hawkins], The National Names Database, Last accessed July 17, 2008.</ref> 

Hawkins and Drake escaped in "Minion" and "Judith", while their larger ships were taken or destroyed. The attack and subsequent hardships were instrumental in hardening the attitude of Drake in particular (whose had lived in poverty after his farming family were displaced by a Catholic rebellion) towards Catholicism and Spain.  

The fortress was the last point in New Spain to be held by Spain, after the Mexican War of Independence. It surrendered to General Miguel Barragán in November 1825.