'''Pilihan raya umum di Indonesia''' diadakan untuk memilih Presiden Indonesia, serta juga untuk Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat (DPR), dewan perundangannya. Kedua-dua Presiden dan anggota-anggota DPR dipilih untuk tempoh lima tahun. 

Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat dipilih melalui  perwakilan berkadar daripada calon-calon kawasan pilihan raya. Oleh sebab Indonesia mengamalkan sistem berbilang parti, tiada sebarang parti tunggal yang biasanya dapat benar-benar mencapai kemenangan dan oleh itu, parti-parti politik harus bekerjasama untuk membentuk kerajaaan campuran.

Umur mengundi di Indonesia sekurang-kurangnya 17 tahun. Pada sepanjang sejarah Indonesia, Indonesia telah mengadakan sembilan pilihan raya umum, iaitu pada tahun 1955, 1971, 1977, 1982, 1987, 1992, 1997, 1999, dan 2004:

<br clear=all>
==Pilihan raya umum terkini==

Pilihan Raya Umum Indonesia, 2004 merupakan pilihan raya umum pertama yang para pengundi dapat memilih calon-calon Presiden dan Timbalan Presiden Indonesia secara langsung. Pemenang pilih raya umum ini ialah Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono.

Pilihan raya umum ini diadakan dalam dua pusingan. Pusingan pertama dimenangi oleh  Golkar, diikuti oleh Parti Demokrasi Indonesia Perjuangan (PDI-P). Pusingan kedua digunakan untuk memilih presiden yang diwarnai persaingan antara Yudhoyono dan Megawati Sukarnoputri yang akhirnya dimenangi oleh pasangan Yudhoyono-Jusuf Kalla.

Pertukaran kekuasaan berlangsung dengan lancar dan merupakan suatu peristiwa bersejarah bagi Indonesia yang belum pernah mengalami sebarang pertukaran kekuasaan tanpa huru-hara. Satu-satunya cacat pada pertukaran kekuasaan ini adalah ketidakhadiran Megawati untuk upacara pelantikan Yudhoyono sebagai presiden.

==Pilihan raya umum dahulu==
===Pilihan Raya Umum 1955===

Pilihan raya umum yang pertama di Indonesia diadakan pada tahun 1955, dan bertujuan untuk memilih anggota-anggota Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat serta Majlis Perlembagaan Indonesia (Konstituante). Pilihan raya umum ini dikendalikan oleh kerajaan Perdana Menteri Ali Sastroamidjojo, namun Ali Sastroamidjojo pada dirinya tidak bertanding, dan Burhanuddin Harahap kemudian menjadi Perdana Menteri. 

Pilihan Raya Umum Indonesia 1955 diadakan pada dua peringkat, iaitu:
* Pemilihan anggota Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat (DPR) yang diadakan pada 29 September 1955, dan disertai oleh 29 buah parti politik dan orang perseorangan;
* Pemilihan anggota Majlis Perlembagaan Indonesia (Konstituante) yang diadakan pada 15 Disember 1955. 

Lima buah parti politik yang terbesar dalam pilihan raya ini ialah Parti Nasional Indonesia, Masyumi, Nahdlatul Ulama, Parti Komunis Indonesia, dan Parti Syarikat Islam Indonesia.

At a national level, Indonesian people elect a head of state&nbsp;&ndash; the president &ndash; and a legislature. The president is elected for a five-year term, as is the 550-member People's Representative Council (''Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat'', DPR).

The Council is elected by constituencies. As Indonesia has a multi-party system, no one party is usually able to secure an outright victory, meaning that parties need to work together in coalition governments.

The voting age in Indonesia is 17.

==Latest elections==

==Past elections==
===1955===
Indonesia's first general election elected members of the DPR and the Constitutional Assembly of Indonesia (''Konstituante''). The election was organised by the government of Prime Minister Ali Sastroamidjojo. Sastroamidjojo himself declined to stand for election, and Burhanuddin Harahap became Prime Minister.

The election occurred in two stages:
* The election of the members of the People's Representative Council, which took place on 29 September 1955. Twenty-nine political parties and individuals took part;
* The election for the members of the Constitutional Assembly, which took place on 15 December 1955.

The five largest parties in the election were the National Party of Indonesia (''Partai Nasional Indonesia''), Masyumi, Nahdlatul Ulama, the Communist Party of Indonesia (''Partai Komunis Indonsia'', PKI), and the Indonesian Islam Alliance Party (''Partai Syarikat Islam Indonesia'').

===1971===
This election, the first after the establishment of the "New Order", took place on 5 July 1971. Ten political parties participated.

The five largest political parties were Golkar, Nahdlatul Ulama, Parmusi, the National Party of Indonesia and the Indonesian Islam Alliance Party.

===Fusion of political parties===
In 1975, legislation was passed that required all political parties except Golkar to merge into one of two alternative parties, the United Development Party (''Partai Persatuan Pembangunan'', PPP) or the Indonesian Democratic Party (''Partai Demokrasi Indonesia'', PDI).<!--This was because...? Breakdown of PR? More authoritarian government?-->

===Elections under the New Order (1977-1997)===
 
Elections following the mergers were held under the government of President Suharto. In accordance with the legislation, these were contested by three groups; Golkar, the PPP and the PDI. All elections in this period were won by Golkar.

To ensure that Golkar always won more than 60 percent of the popular vote, the New Order regime used a number of tactics. These included:

; Reducing the number of opponents : In 1973, the existing political parties were forced to merge into the United Development Party (PPP) and the Indonesian Democratic Party (PDI). These were the only parties allowed to contest general elections. ''(Liddle 1978)''

; Weakening the remaining opponents : The two political parties were forbidden to criticize government policy (REF), and the government had to approve all slogans they used. Furthermore, they were not allowed to organize at the village level (where the majority of Indonesians live). To stop the rise of charismatic figures, their candidates had to be vetted by the government. When a potentially charismatic figure (in the form of founding president Sukarno's daughter Megawati Sukarnoputri) became leader of the PDI, the government engineered a political convention in Medan in 1996 to remove her. Ironically, the ensuing disturbances at the PDI's Jakarta headquarters began a chain of events that indirectly led to the downfall of the New Order. ''(Liddle 1978; Loveard 1999; Evans 2003)''

; Coercion to vote Golkar : Civil servants were ordered to support Golkar, or face accusations of insubordination. Private sector workers were reminded of the need for "stability". Many people believed the vote was not secret, and the government did little to persuade them otherwise. Many voters were still at school, and they were warned by teachers of a link between their choice at the ballot box and exam success (Evans 2003)