'''Harold Sydney Bride''' (ur. statku po kolizji z górą lodową 14 kwietnia 1912.

W lipcu 1911 ukończył szkolenie w Marconi Company i rozpoczął służbę na morzu jako radiooperator.

W Belfaście. W czasie Jackem Phillipsem, wysyłając depesze pasażerów i odbierając ostrzeżenia od innych statków o spotykanych w okolicy górach lodowych.

Smith wydał polecenie, aby radiooficerowie byli przygotowani do wysłania sygnału alarmowego. Po północy kapitan rozkazał nadać wołanie o pomoc i pozycję tonącego statku. Phillips nadawał sygnał CQD, a Bride przekazywał informacje kapitanowi, gdyż kabina radiowa nie miała połączenia telefonicznego z mostkiem kapitańskim. Półżartem, Bride zaproponował Philipsowi, aby ten wysłał nowy, wprowadzony w 1908, sygnał alarmowy SOS, mówiąc, że druga okazja może się już nie nadarzyć. I tak z pokładu ''Titanica'', po raz drugi (a nie, jak powszechnie się uważa, po raz pierwszy) w historii, popłynął w eter sygnał SOS.

Na krótko przed zatonięciem statku, kapitan zwolnił radiooperatorów ze służby, ale Phillips pozostał na stanowisku do chwili zalania kabiny. Bride pomagał przy próbie opuszczenia składanej łodzi ratunkowej B, która ostatecznie została zmyta z pokładu i unosiła się na wodzie do góry dnem. Bride zdołał wspiąć się na nią i, wraz z innymi 15 członkami załogi, został uratowany przez ''Haroldowi Cottamowi wysyłać wiadomości od ocalałych pasażerów ''Titanica''.

right

'''Harold Sydney Bride''' (RMS ''Titanic''. The ''Titanic'' struck an iceberg at 11:40 pm Jack Phillips, Bride helped inform ''Titanic''<nowiki>'s</nowiki> Captain Smith about the ships coming to ''Titanic''<nowiki>'s</nowiki> assistance. The next morning, after ''Titanic'' sank, Bride was rescued by the RMS ''Carpathia'' and despite being injured, helped the ''Carpathia''<nowiki>'s</nowiki> wireless operator transmit survivor lists and personal messages from the ship.

==Early history==
Harold Bride was born in ''Lusitania'', and the ''Anselm''.

==RMS ''Titanic''==
In RMS ''Titanic'' as the Junior Wireless operator and assistant to John "Jack" Phillips at deck, Bride and Phillips sent out passenger's personal messages and received iceberg warnings from other ships.

On the evening of Newfoundland.

The ''Titanic'' hit an iceberg at 11:40 pm that night and began sinking. Bride woke up shortly after and asked Phillips what was happening. Phillips said they struck something; Bride acknowledged Phillips and began to get ready to go on duty. Captain Edward Smith soon came into the wireless room alerting Bride and Phillips to be ready to send out a distress signal. Shortly after midnight he came in and told them to request help and gave them the ship's position.

Jack Phillips sent out RMS ''Carpathia'', wouldn’t reach ''Titanic'' until after it sank. At one point Bride reminded Phillips that the new code was forward part of the ship was flooded and that they should put on more clothes and lifebelts. Bride began to get ready while Phillips went back to work on the wireless machine.

The wireless power was almost completely out when Captain Smith arrived and told the men that they had done their duty and that they were relieved. Phillips continued working while Bride gathered some money and personal belongings. When his back was turned a crew member had sneaked in and was taking Phillips' lifebelt. Bride saw and grabbed the man while Phillips stood up and knocked the crew member out. The water was beginning to flood the boat deck as they ran out of the wireless room and Bride began helping remove one of the last two lifeboats, lifeboat B, off the roof of the officer's quarters. The crew was unable to launch the lifeboat before it was washed off the deck upside down; Bride was also washed off the deck and found himself under the overturned lifeboat. He swam out from under the lifeboat and climbed onto it and he and fifteen other men were able to survive on the slowly sinking lifeboat; however Phillips, who had also made it to lifeboat B, died before rescue came. Bride and the others on lifeboat B were later rescued by other nearby lifeboats and they slowly rowed towards the rescue ship, the RMS ''Carpathia'', which had arrived on the scene.