thumb|300px|Film shooting on Location in Downtown Los Angeles
The Location Department is an often forgotten yet integral department in the creation of a motion picture.  Like the Hollywood, they are represented by the International Brotherhood of Teamsters Local 399, and nationwide they have the production as being part of the management of a show and as such, are generally paid a weekly salary as opposed to an hourly wage.

The Location Manager is responsible for the finding and securing locations to be used and coordinating the logistics involved for the production to successfully complete its necessary work.  They are also the face of the production to the community  and responsible for addressing the issues that may arise due to the production's impact on the community.  

The salary changes with how much experience a person has and can range from a couple hundred dollars a day on low budget films to almost a thousand dollars a day on commercials. 

The Location Manager typically is also the primary Location Scout for a film. They usually oversee several other scouts and assistant managers during the course of a show.  They will commonly work closely with the director and the production designer during preproduction to find and secure the creative vision expressed by them. They are also responsible for public relations at the locations used and the safety of the crew during filming.

A Location Scout is responsible for the initial scouting of all the locations used in a film and translates the scene into a viable and appropriate location.  An experienced Location Scout will take into account all the logistics necessary for the production to adequately work.  
 
Some of the things that a Location Scout needs to be aware of before submitting a location for approval are the fees and budgetary restrictions of the production, local permitting costs and regulations, camera and lighting requirements, convenience to other locations, crew, production services, crew and unit parking, and possibly incidental issues such as direction of the sun, demonstrations and even interest by local organized crime families.

Once a location has been determined to meet the appropriate look, the Location Manager must then schedule dates for preparation, wrap and strike, and negotiate with the property owner an appropriate fee as well as fees to any neighbors and tenants that may also be impacted by the production. The Location Manager will also apply for the necessary permits through the local municipality and/or community and housing associations, arrange parking for trucks, equipment and crew, prepare temporary facilities for holding production, talent, crew and meals, and ensuring the security of the location, the safety of the crew while minimizing the impact to the surrounding community.

En cinéma et télévision, le '''régisseur général''',  collaborateur direct du directeur de production, est le responsable de l'organisation matérielle et logistique d'un tournage.

Il intervient dès la préparation du tournage en participant au repèrage des décors et lieux de tournage.

Sa mission est de permettre le tournage sur les décors repérés.
Cela comprend donc les demandes d'autorisations de tournage auprès de particuliers, des autorités (mairie, DDE...), l'organisation des accès et le stationnement des véhicules techniques (camion machinerie, éclairage, régie, loges, cantine, ...), l'organisation de l'hébergement, du transport des troupes...

Pendant le tournage, il doit assurer la coordination de diverses opérations prévues au plan de travail et autres plannings. Il doit donc organiser les transports (de comédiens, d'intervenants, ...), la prise en charge et les rendus de matériels, et de manière générale régler les problèmes pratiques.

Il est assisté d'un régisseur adjoint et d'assistants régisseurs adjoints plus ou moins nombreux selon l'ampleur du projet.