{{Articleissues
| citations missing = July 2008
| nofootnotes = y
| onesource = July 2008
| OR = July 2008
| refimprove = July 2008
| synthesis = July 2008
}}

200px|thumb|Statue of the Fallen Angel, [[Retiro Park (Madrid, Spain).]]
In some Christian doctrines, a '''fallen angel''' is an Judgment Day, when they will be banished to Hell.

== Origin of the term ==
The origin of the term lies in the Hebrew word for "giant". The Hebrew word translated as "giants" here is marry human women and have children with them. Jude makes mention of these angels in the New Testament:  Due to the disastrous results of this forbidden intermingling, many have come to view the word "fallen" as denoting a fall from grace, though it seems that the original meaning was simply to descend from the heavens.

The distinction of good and bad angels constantly appears in the Bible, but it is instructive to note that there is no sign of any the Kingdom of God and the Kingdom of the Evil One, but the latter's inferiority is always supposed. The existence, then, of this inferior, and therefore created, spirit, has to be explained. 

The gradual development of Hebrew language consciousness on this point is very clearly marked in the inspired writings. The account of the fall of the First Parents (Genesis 3) is couched in such terms that it is difficult to see in it anything more than the acknowledgment of the existence of a principle of evil who was jealous of the human race. 

The statement (Genesis 6:1) that the "Enoch 6-9, and codices, D, E F, and A of the Septuagint read frequently, for "sons of God", ''oi aggeloi tou theou''. Unfortunately, codices B and C are defective in Ge., vi, but it is probably that they, too, read ''oi aggeloi'' in this passage, for they constantly so render the expression "sons of God"; cf. Job 1:6, 2:1, 38:7; but on the other hand, see Psalms 2:1; 85; & (Septuagint). Philo, in commenting on the passage in his treatise "Quod Deus sit immutabilis", i, follows the Septuagint. For Philo's doctrine of Angels, cf. "De Vita Mosis", iii, 2, "De Somniis", VI: "De Incorrupta Manna", i; "De Sacrificis", ii; "De Lege Allegorica", I, 12; III, 73; and for the view of Genesis 6:1, cf. St. Justin, Apol., ii 5.

==Job 1-2==
The picture afforded us in Job 1-2 is equally imaginative; but Satan, perhaps the earliest individualization of the fallen Angel, is presented as an intruder who is jealous of Job. He can be seen as clearly an inferior being to the Deity and can only touch Job with God's permission, or as the ultimate embodiment of pride, as per his believed characteristics, trying to prove God's summation of Job's character and faith is flawed. By playing within the limitations God Himself has set Satan affords himself the opportunity to attempt to cause Job to curse the Lord and there-by, in affect, prove God wrong in order to prove himself to be correct, and therefore superior to God, but he fails. How theologic thought advanced as the sum of revelation grew appears from a comparison of II Kings 24:1, with I Paral., xxi, 1. 

Whereas in the former passage David's sin was said to be due to "the wrath of the Lord" which "stirred up David", in the latter we read that "Satan moved David to number Israel". In Job. iv, 18, we seem to find a definite declaration of the fall: "In his angels he found wickedness." The Septuagint of Job contains some instructive passages regarding avenging angels in whom we are perhaps to see fallen spirits, thus xxxiii, 23: "If a thousand death-dealing angels should be (against him) not one of them shall wound him"; and xxxvi, 14: "If their souls should perish in their youth (through rashness) yet their life shall be wounded by the angels"; and xxi, 15: "The riches unjustly accumulated shall be vomited up, an angel shall drag him out of his house;" cf. Prov., xvii, 11; Ps., xxxiv, 5, 6; lxxvii, 49, and especially, Ecclesiasticus, xxxix, 33, a text which, as far as can be gathered from the present state of the manuscript, was in the Hebrew original. 

In some of these passages, it is true, the angels may be regarded as avengers of God's justice without therefore being evil spirits. In Zach., iii, 1-3, Satan is called the adversary who pleads before the Lord against Jesus the High Priest. Isaias, xiv, and Ezech., xxviii, are for the Fathers the loci classici regarding the fall of Satan (cf. Tertull., adv. Marc., II, x); and Jesus Himself has given colour to this view by using the imagery of the latter passage when saying to His Apostles: "I saw Satan like lightning falling from heaven" (Luke 10:18).

==New Testament==
In Matthew 25:41; 2 Peter 2:4; Ephesians 6:12; 2 Corinthians 11:14; 12:7). Christian imagery of the devil as the dragon is mainly derived from the Apocalypse (ix, 11-15; xii, 7-9), where he is termed  "the dragon", "the old serpent", etc., and is represented as having actually been in combat with Archangel Michael. Also, an image is given him as a "roaring lion seeking whom he may devour (as seen in II Peter)" gives context, and substance of his role as the tempter of the inhabitants of the earth. The similarity between scenes such as these and the early Babylonian accounts of the struggle between Merodach and the dragon Tiamat is very striking. Whether we are to trace its origin to vague reminiscences of the mighty saurians which once people the earth is a moot question, but the curious reader may consult Bousett, "The Anti-Christ Legend" (tr. by Keane, London, 1896). The translator has prefixed to it an interesting discussion on the origin of the Babylonian Dragon-Myth.

== Reasons for their fall ==
thumb|[[Gustave Doré's depiction of Satan from John Milton's ''Paradise Lost'']]

There are a number of different beliefs regarding the origins and motivations of fallen angels. Many focus on issues of free will, lust, pride, or the incomprehensibility of the acts of God.  

=== Consequences of free will ===
It is generally accepted by most Christians that the fallen angels were cast out of Heaven because of actions taken against God. These actions were enabled because the angels were granted free will. Generally, these actions included active rebellion, doubt in God's motives or plans, or a rejection of the system of Heaven. Pride is often involved, especially in cases where an angel believed itself to hold more authority than God. (Lucifer being the prime example among these).

====Origen====
Origen, a father of the early Christian Church, believed that God had created all angels to be equal and free. However, in possessing the power of free will, some of them began to move further away from God of their own volition. 

Origen states metaphorically that, although some angels fell and became human or demonic, all hope is not lost. He theorizes that by practicing virtue, men and demons can again become angels. While considered an early Father of the Church, Origen was deemed a heretic as a result of some of his writings and teachings, which did not conform to accepted scripture or tradition. Mainly, his concept of Apocatastasis, the belief that all beings (human beings, fallen angels, demons, and Satan) will return to God through God's love and mercy, was deemed unacceptable at that time. His excommunication was posthumously reversed.

==== Lust ====
The following comes from a series of ancient texts referenced in the Bible called "The Three Books of Enoch", a set of books found in the Pseudepigrapha of the Old Testament. 

According to these books, it is because of lust that some angels fell from Heaven. God asked the "Watchers" (Eden. Those Grigori who descended to Earth saw the daughters of men and became enchanted with them. Consequently, the Grigori began to reveal to man some of the secrets of Heaven, such as Great Flood to cleanse the Earth of the wanton killing and destruction perpetrated by the Nephilim. Notable angels who fell in this account are Semyazza, Samael, Azazel, and Lucifer.

==== Pride ====
This belief involves revolution against God, well known amongst Christians. Pride, the gravest of the seven deadly sins, eventually led to the expulsion from Heaven of certain beings, up to and including the highest orders of angels. Lucifer, who himself succumbed to pride, was the first and mightiest angel to be created. With intelligence, radiance, beauty, and power unmatched among all of the angels in Heaven, Lucifer was second in majesty only to God Himself. 

Unfortunately, Lucifer became ambitious and self-centered, eventually deciding to prove his power by raising his throne to the height of God's throne. Other angels did not approve of Lucifer's plan; they did not want a lower being trying symbolically to become the equal of God. When Lucifer enacted his scheme, he was instantly hurled out of Heaven. This account of the rebellion might have come from several ancient deities. 

Catholic theologians have speculated that the incarnation of Christ was revealed to the angels. The idea that all of Heaven must bow before Christ, formed in part from the lesser nature of humanity, motivated the prideful actions of Lucifer (cf. Suarez, De Angelis, lib. VII, xiii).

According to the Book of Enoch, Johnalyn was known as the prettiest of God's angels that did not betray Him. She became most well known for the inspiration of Eve. As God made Adam in his own image God made Eve in the image of Johnalyn.

==== Modern Catholic view ====

'''堕天使'''（だてんし）とは、もともとは旧約聖書、偽典にある天使の身でありながら高慢、嫉妬、自由意志などの理由でヤハウェ・エロヒム（主なる神）に反逆し結果、天界を追放、つまり堕天された者のことを指す。

堕天使は悪魔と同一視されることが多いが、厳密に言えば意味は違ってくる。堕天使は前述したように天使の身でありながら、ヤハウェに反逆し天界を追放された存在という直接的な意味を持っており、一方の悪魔はヤハウェに反逆したもの、人を悪の道へ導く者、地獄に存在する者というヤハウェへのアンチテーゼ自体を示したような意味を持つ。

== 堕天した理由 ==
thumb|300px|ギュスターヴ・ドレ『失楽園』
キリスト教的な観点において、その理由は様々であり1つの観点だけを鵜呑みにするのは危険である。

下記のうち、高慢によるもの、嫉妬によるもの、の二つはよくキリスト教を題材とした作品に使われることが多い。

===高慢によるもの===
天界において神の直下の座にいた天使ルシファーは他の天使を統べる大天使長であった。強大な権威と力をもつ彼に「自分は神をも凌ぐ力を持っているのではないか」という驕りが出てしまった。そのため、味方となる天使を集め神に対して反旗を翻した。が、結果はルシファーの敗北に終わり彼とその仲間は堕天されてしまう。

===嫉妬によるもの===
神は人間に天使以上の愛情を注いだ。当然の如く、それに反発したのは神から最も信頼を得ているとされる大天使ルシファーだった。天使は炎から生み出され人間は土塊から創造される。人間は天使ほどの権威も無ければ力も無いのだ。ルシファーは明らかに自分達より下位な存在であるのに神から寵愛を受けている人間に怒りを覚えた。そして神により強い愛情を抱いていた彼はその怒りを嫉妬心に変えた。また、彼の嫉妬心は神への怒りにも変えた。そのため、同志である他の天使と共に神に挑んだが、結局は敗北し堕天されてしまう。その後、地上へ堕ちたルシファーは寵愛の対象となっていた人間に挑戦するようになった（『創世記』天地創造によればエロヒムは森羅万象すべての物を創造したが、その中には人間もあり、「われわれのかたちに、われわれをかたどって」人間が創られた）。