'''Georges Frêche''' (born French University Montpellier 1. Frêche was a member of the French socialist party until he was expelled on January 27, 2007.

A long-time political figure within French political circles, Frêche is an extremely controversial character, on one side a great builder and visionary, on the other side criticized and condemned in court for his controversial, sometimes racial remarks.

== Legacy ==
Frêche served as the mayor of tertiary industries such as banking, electronics and drinkable water processing.

While he was a member of French's Socialist Party (PS), and the leader of one of the largest socialist federations in France, Georges Frêche was never given a minister position in any socialist government, not even as socialist political scandal in France). It is also to be noted that he had antagonized François Mitterrand as early as the foundation of the current French Socialist Party in 1971, being cast aside even at that date.

On January 27, 2007, the French Socialist Party announced that, after reviewing his case, and especially one of his many "outings", about how many Black players are in the French soccer team, Frêche was permanently expelled from the Socialist Party. Allegedly, Frêche wasn't trying to be racist, and was instead talking about Caucasians being bad at sports, because they aren't "hungry" enough, but he did have much more worrysome "outings" in the past, and it can be said that the Party has finally come to terms with the long list of controversial speeches during his entire career.

== Management style ==
Georges Frêche is, at the same time, respected and feared by both his opponents, and members of his own party. He is known to be generous to his supporters and crush anyone who opposes him, whatever political party they belong to. As a result, he is not grooming anyone as his "political descendent".

'''Georges Frêche''' (* Tarn) ist ein französischer Politiker.

Er studierte an der HEC  Rechtsgeschichte, spezialisierte sich auf die römische Rechtsgeschichte und ist Professor an der Universität von Montpellier. Er ist Mitglied der sozialistischen Partei Frankreichs (PS).

Georges Frêche war von 1973 bis 1997 Abgeordneter des Departements Herault und von 1977 bis 2004 Oberbürgermeister von Montpellier. Als Oberbürgermeister traf er zuweilen umstrittenen Entscheidungen u. a. für den Bau einer Straßenbahnlinie, des Olympiaschwimmbades und eines Netzes von Bibliotheken inklusive einer großen Zentralbibliothek ("Bibliothek Émile Zola"). 

Nach den gewonnenen Regionalwahlen im Jahr 2004 trat er vom Posten des Oberbürgermeisters zurück, blieb aber Berater der Stadt Montpellier und Präsident des Ballungsraums Montpellier.

Er setzte sich für den Bau einer zweiten Straßenbahnlinie in Montpellier und des Vergnügungsparks "Odysseum" ein. 2005 versuchte er eine Fusion der Kommunen des Ballungsraumes Montpellier, der von Séte und der von Méze als Vorspiel eines Großballungsraumes zu erwirken, was jedoch misslang.

Frêche lehnte die Präsidentschaft der Region 1998 Languedoc-Rousillon nach einer Koalition der Partei von Jacques Blanc (damals UDF) mit der rechtsextremisten Front national ab. Nach dem Sieg der Linken im März 2004 in Frankreich wurde Frêche Präsident der Region Languedoc-Rousillon in einer linken Koalition.