'''ニック・ロウ'''（Nick Lowe、ロックミュージシャン、作曲家、ベーシスト、音楽プロデューサー。

1966年にKippington Lodgeのメンバーとしてデビュー。後にKippington Lodgeはブリンズレー・シュウォーツ(Brinsley Schwarz)になる。ブリンズレー・シュウォーツは1970年代のイギリスを代表するパブロックバンドといわれるようになる。

ブリンズレー・シュウォーツ解散後は、スティッフ・レコードのハウス・プロデューサーとして評価を得る（ダムド『Damned Damned Damned』など）一方、デイヴ・エドモンズらとロックパイルとして活動。ロックパイル解散後は、ソロ活動やエルビス・コステロ、プリテンダーズらのプロデューサーとしても活躍した。

1980年代末期にはライ・クーダー、ジョン・ハイアット、ジム・ケルトナーと共にLittle Villageを結成し、1992年に唯一のアルバム『Little Village』を発表。

'''Nick Lowe''' (born Nicholas Drain Lowe, English producer who records and performs in a number of different musical styles; along with vocals, Lowe plays UK.

==Career==
Lowe began his recording career in 1966 as a member of Kippington Lodge, founded with his friend Brinsley Schwarz, which released a few singles on Parlophone. Three years later Kippington Lodge had changed its name to Brinsley Schwarz and its musical focus to country- and blues-rock. Lowe's best-known songs from the Brinsley Schwarz era are "(What's So Funny 'Bout) Peace, Love, and Understanding," which was a major hit for Elvis Costello in 1979, and "Cruel to Be Kind," a song the other band members rejected but was later a solo hit for Lowe.

After leaving Brinsley Schwarz in the mid-1970s, Lowe began playing in EP was Lowe's 1977 four-track release ''Low'') . On this and other labels, Lowe would go on to produce The Damned's ''Damned Damned Damned'' and many albums by Elvis Costello, including ''My Aim Is True'', ''This Year's Model'', and ''Armed Forces''. His early 'rough & ready' production style earned him the nickname Basher (as in 'bash it out now, tart it up later'). Upon moving from Stiff to Jake Riviera's Radar and F-Beat labels, Lowe became extremely selective in his choice of production tasks.

Because the two main singers in Rockpile had contracts with different record labels and managers, albums were always credited to either Lowe or Edmunds, so there is only one official Rockpile album, which wasn't released until the waning days of the collaboration—1980's ''Seconds of Pleasure,'' featuring the Lowe songs "When I Write The Book" and "Heart." However, two of the pair's most significant of solo albums from the period--Lowe's ''Labour of Lust'' and Edmund's ''Repeat When Necessary''-- were effectively Rockpile albums (as was Carlene Carter's Lowe-produced ''Musical Shapes'' album). Rockpile's demise was hastened by a number of conflicts between Lowe's and Edmunds' respective managers, not Lowe and Edmunds themselves.

Lowe's best-known song from this era is probably "I Knew the Bride (When She Used to Rock 'n' Roll)" (the verse structure and topic adapted from The News played on the track). 

Lowe was quoted as saying that he had "escaped from the tyranny of the snare drum", when explaining his move away from regular pop music that would get played on mainstream radio.

Other well-known Lowe songs include "(I Love The Sound of) Breaking Glass," "All Men Are Liars," and "Billboard'' charts in 1979.

In 1979, Lowe married country singer Carlene Carter, daughter of country singers Carl Smith and June Carter Cash and stepdaughter of Johnny Cash. He adopted her daughter, Tiffany Anastasia Lowe. The marriage ended in the mid-eighties, but they remained friends, and Lowe remained close to the Carter/Cash family. He played and recorded with Johnny Cash, and Cash recorded several of Lowe's songs. Lowe's first son, Roy Lowe, was born in 2005.

After the demise of Rockpile, Lowe toured for a period with his band Noise To Go and later with The Cowboy Outfit, which also included the noted keyboard player Paul Carrack. Lowe was also a member of the short-lived mainly studio project Little Village with John Hiatt, Ry Cooder and Jim Keltner.

In 1992, "(What's So Funny 'Bout) Peace, Love, and Understanding" was covered by Curtis Stigers on the soundtrack album to ''The Bodyguard'', an album that sold over 15 million copies.  Because Lowe received royalties from these sales, he suddenly found himself a millionaire.  Freed from commercial constraints, Lowe has recorded more solo albums in his own very individual style to critical acclaim.

A New York ''Daily News'' article<ref>[http://www.nydailynews.com/entertainment/music/2007/06/17/2007-06-17_cruel_to_be_kind_of_old-1.html "Cruel to be kind of old" by Jim Farber, New York Daily News, June 17, 2007]</ref> quoted Lowe as saying his greatest fear in recent years was "sticking with what you did when you were famous". "I didn't want to become one of those thinning-haired, jowly old geezers who still does the same shtick they did when they were young, slim and beautiful," he said. "That's revolting and rather tragic." Rock critic Jim Farber observed: "Lowe's recent albums, epitomized by the new ''At My Age'', moved him out of the realms of ironic pop and animated rock and into the role of a worldly balladeer, specializing in grave vocals and graceful tunes. Lowe's four most recent solo albums mine the wealth of American roots music, drawing on vintage country, soul and R&B to create an elegant mix of his own."