thumb|Karin Spaink in 2006
'''Karin Spaink''' (born december 20, 1957 in Amsterdam) is a journalist, writer and feminist.

Spaink is a free speech advocate and social critic. Some of her battles include:
* New-age writers who assert all diseases are only a psychological phenomenon;
* The Church of Scientology, who sued her for more than ten years;
* American pro-choice advocates who got a pro-life site banned because of texts that were held to be construed as a literal, illegal call for mutilation and murder of medical doctors who perform abortions. (Spaink describes herself as pro-choice on the issue of abortion, but felt that freedom of speech prevailed in the latter case);
* The right to inform people about methods of suicide and to discuss the danger or reliability of various methods.

==Biography==
Spaink was born in Amsterdam and trained as a secondary school teacher from 1975 to 1981, specialising in English. From 1981 to 1984 she studied sociology at the University of Amsterdam.

She was diagnosed with multiple sclerosis in 1986. She started writing freelance around this time.

In 1986 and 1987 she trained as a computer programmer, at Volmac and Fokker, In this period she worked for the Pacifist Socialist Party. From 1988 until 1990 she worked for Fokker.

She writes a regular column for ''Het Parool'' (1992 to present) and previously wrote for ''De Groene Amsterdammer'' (1998 to 2000). 

From 2001 to 2004 she was an external advisor for the Freedom of the Media bureau (FOM) of the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), advising them on freedom of speech and the internet.

In 2005 she became the chief editor of a new book series, [http://www.tnty.nl The Next Ten Years]. The first book in the series dealt with electronic patient records (EPR) and the accompanying hack of two major hospitals lead to a debate in parliament. A few months later, the national introduction of EPR's was stalled by the Department of Health, citing Spaink's research. In that same year, she embarked on writing the history of XS4ALL and Hack-Tic.

In March 2006, she was diagnosed with breast cancer and subsequently underwent mastectomy and chemotherapy.

== Disputes with New Age proponents over physical ailments == 
Spaink first came into the national limelight by accusing New Age writers such as Louise Hay, Thorwald Dethlefsen and Bernie Siegel of over-simplifying physical ailments by reducing them to a purely psychological phenomenon. Spaink, herself suffering from multiple sclerosis, was insulted by the suggestion that her disease was nothing more than the result of her own lack of willingness to heal. (Compare Idealism and responsibility assumption with Materialism; see also New Thought Movement.)

Her essay ''Het strafbare lichaam'' ("The Penal Body") coined neologisms such as ''kwakdenken'' ("quack thinking") and ''orenmaffia'' ("mind mob") that even made it into the Dutch language dictionary. The latter term derived from the expression that something is "all between the ears," in other words, "all in the mind."

== Scientology ==
In 1995, the Church of Scientology began a legal campaign to remove what it held were copyright infringements and trade secrets from the Internet; see Scientology vs. the Internet. Spaink was one of the first famous Dutch Internet personalities and was one of the first of what became about a hundred Dutch people to put up pages containing the Fishman Affidavit in protest against the actions of the church.

The Church of Scientology responded by suing Karin Spaink and a large number of Internet providers, including XS4ALL, for copyright infringement. Part of the Fishman Affidavit were documents that Fishman had asserted to be the official teachings of Scientology. The defendants responded by challenging the church to prove it was actually the copyright holder of the disputed documents.

The church allowed a Dutch notary compare the church-copyrighted documents with the texts on Spaink's homepage. Through her lawyers, Karin Spaink received a copy and started rewriting her homepage, just a week away from the court date for handling the motion for summary judgement. Spaink replaced the contested documents with an analysis of the documents, quoting liberally, but not too liberally from them; Dutch copyright law does not have a fair use provision, but allows quotation for purposes of scientific dissemination. A representative of the Church of Scientology used this occurrence to back up an assertion that the church had won the court case.

The hearing on the merits was decided more along both lines: it was found that service providers do have a responsibility for documents that users put up on their web site; however, any claims that Karin Spaink was breaking the church's copyright were found unfounded, because Spaink had reworked her homepage as soon as she had discovered that the church indeed had valid claims to portions of the documents on that homepage. This implicitly meant that the scholarly study of the church's documents on Spaink's homepage was in fact legal according to the decision.

Court costs were divided equally between parties. In the Netherlands these usually run into (only) thousands of American Scientology adversaries had to pay after losing their own, US based court cases. This may be an indication of why Spaink can still fight the church, and why it is claimed by Scientology critics that the barrage of law suits brought on by the church is not the making use of a legal right, but a form of harassment (barratry).

thumb|right|Karin Spaink
'''Karin Spaink''' (Amsterdam, 20 december 1957) is een Nederlandse activiste, columniste, essayiste, publiciste, schrijfster en feministe.

Spaink volgde in Amsterdam van Fokker.

Ze was van PSP (een van de drie partijen die opgingen in Fokker Aircraft van 1988 tot 1990.

==Schrijfster en columniste==
Vanaf 1985 is Spaink freelance schrijfster en columniste; onder meer voor Het Parool (1992 tot heden) en De Groene Amsterdammer (van 1998 tot 2000). Tevens houdt zij lezingen. Daarnaast is ze actief op bestuurlijk terrein, onder meer als voorzitter van Bits of Freedom en als bestuurslid van Spamvrij.nl.

==Multiple sclerose==
In 1986 werd multiple sclerose bij haar geconstateerd. Door goedbedoelde maar onprettig overkomende opmerkingen van bekenden ging ze zich verdiepen in het werk van alternatieve genezers die de patiënt de schuld gaven van zijn of haar ziekte en zette ze de tegenaanval in. In  1992 lanceerde Spaink het woord ''orenmaffia''.

In gender en transseksualiteit; in maart 2006 de Aletta Jacobs-lezing over feminisme en openbaarheid.

==Rechtszaak tegen Scientology==

thumb|300px|T-shirt ter gelegenheid van het winnen van de rechtszaak
Spaink raakte in 1995 verwikkeld in een rechtszaak die tegen haar werd aangespannen door Scientology, omdat ze het auteursrecht van Scientology zou hebben geschonden door teksten van Scientology op haar website te publiceren.