Il territorio dell<nowiki>'</nowiki>'''Austria''' è diviso in 84 '''distretti politici''' (''Politische Bezirke'') e 15 '''città statutarie''' (''Statutarstädte'') ognuna delle quali costituisce un distretto a sé stante, questi distretti urbani hanno le stesse funzioni dei distretti politici.

==Funzioni==
I distretti dell'Austria sono simili ai circondari rurali della Germania. La sede amministrativa del distretto è guidata da un ''Bezirkshauptmann'' incaricato dell'applicazione delle leggi federali e regionali.
<!--It is in charge of the administration of all matters of federal and state administrative law and subject to orders from the higher instances, usually the ''Landeshauptmann'' (governor) in matters of federal law and the ''Landesregierung'' (state government) in state law. Thus, the distretto is the basic unit of general administration in Austria.

Officials on the distretto level are not elected, but appointed by the state government.-->

Vienna, che è anche una ''Statutarstadt'', è suddivisa in distretti, comunque con una diversa funzione rispetto agli altri (vedi Distretti di Vienna).

thumb|300px|Map of Austria subdivided in the 84 districts. In red the 15 ''Statutarstädte''
Bezirke''), and 15 Statutarstädte which form their own districts. 

==Function==
The Austrian ''Bezirk'' is roughly equivalent to the ''Landkreis'' in Germany. The administrative office of a district, the ''Bezirkshauptmannschaft'' is headed by the ''Bezirkshauptmann''. It is in charge of the administration of all matters of federal and state administrative law and subject to orders from the higher instances, usually the ''Landeshauptmann'' (governor) in matters of federal law and the ''Landesregierung'' (state government) in state law. Thus, the district is the basic unit of general administration in Austria.

Officials on the district level are not elected, but appointed by the state government.
There are also independent cities in Austria. They are called Statutarstadt in Austrian administrative law. These urban districts do have the same tasks as a normal district. 

districts, which are divisions used for local administration by the city government. 

For more information on Austrian administration, see States of Austria.