{{Lost karakteri 
| Başlık=Walt Lloyd|
| Resim=250px<br> Malcolm David Kelley  Walt rolünde|
| ilk görünüş = "Pilot, Part 1"
| son görünüş  = "Live Together, Die Alone"
| Flashbackleri=<!--W:MOS Episodes are in quotations only, not italics -->"Special" <br /> "Exodus, Part 1"|
| Ad=Walter Lloyd|
| Yaş= 
| Durum=
| Meslek= Öğrenci
| Canlandıran =Malcolm David Kelley|
}}
'''Walt Lloyd''' '''Lost''' dizisinde yer alan kurgusal karakter. Canlandıran oyuncu Malcolm David Kelley'dir.

Babası Michael Dawson ile birlikte kazazedeler arasına katılan Walt dizinin ilk sezonunda ''diğerleri'' tarafından kaçırılır. Onu takip çabaları sonrası adanın diğer sakinleri ile karşılaşılır. Diğerleri onun özel yeteneklerle donatılmış (mesela aynı anda başka bir yerde bulunabilmesi gibi) bir çocuk olduğunu düşünmektedir. 

Dizinin ilerleyen bölümlerinde diğerlerinin lideri Henry Gale ile yapılan pazarlıklar sonrası Walt ve Michael Dawson'ın adadan bir botla ayrılmasına izin verilmiştir. Fakat adadan ayrıldıktan sonra ilk olarak Shannon Walt'ı görmüştür. Bunu Sayid'e anlatmış fakat Sayid, Walt'ı adadan ayrıldığı için görmesinin imkansız olduğunu söylese de daha sonra ikisi beraber tekrar görmüştür. Zaten görmelerinin ardından Ana-Lucia Walt'ı görüp onun peşinden koşan Shannon'u tabancayla vurarak ölümüne yol açmıştır. Bu olaydan sonra bir çok bölüm görünmeyen Walt, 3. Sezon finalinde Benjamin tarafından vurulup Dharma üyelerinin toplu mezarına düşen John Locke'u kurtarmıştır. Tüm bunlardan hareketle Walt'ın gerçekten özel yetenekleri olduğu, adadan ayrılmasına rağmen geri dönerek insanlara yardım ettiği düşünülebilir. Keza Shannon Walt'ı en son gördüğünde kendisine susmasını söyledi ve Shannon susmayıp onu kovaladığı için Ana-Lucia tarafından öldürüldü.

{{Infobox Lost character|
 Title=Walt Lloyd |
 Image=250px<br> Malcolm David Kelley as Walt|
 First="Pilot, Part 1"|
 Flashback1=<!--W:MOS Episodes are in quotations only, not italics -->"Special"<br />"Exodus, Part 1"|
 Name=Walter Lloyd|
 Place=Sydney, Australia|
 Profession=N/A|
 Actor=Malcolm David Kelley|
}}
'''Walter Andrew Lloyd''', better known as "'''Walt'''," is a ABC television series ''Lost'' played by Malcolm David Kelley. 

==Character's background==
===Prior to the crash===
thumb|left|150px|Walt as a baby with his father Michael.
Walt is Michael Dawson's 10-year-old son (born August 24, 1994, named after Michael's father, Walter). Walt's mother was Susan Lloyd, a law student and future attorney, who rejected marriage with his father, a construction worker and part-time artist. His mother split up with Michael while Walt was still a baby, and moved with her son to Amsterdam for a plum international law job. Two weeks before Walt's second birthday, while Michael is recovering in a hospital from a car accident, Susan visits him.  She tells him she will cover all his medical expenses. She also tells him that she and her boss, Brian Porter, are planning on getting married and that they will be moving to Rome, Italy, at the end of the month. She insists Michael give up parental rights to Walt so that Brian can adopt him. Michael initially refuses and insists on getting his son back.  A legal battle ensues between Walt's two parents.  Several months later, they finally settle their dispute amicably and Michael accepts to let Susan keep Walt with her.  When Michael sees Walt for the last time to say goodbye, he gives the boy a stuffed polar bear.

Eight years later, Brian tracks down Michael in New York, and tells him that Susan had died in Australia due to a "blood disorder". Brian had left Sydney hastily, arriving in New York the day after Susan's death.  He pleads with Michael to take custody of the boy and even gives him tickets for the flight to Sydney and back, plus extra money for travel expenses. Brian reveals that he had not wanted to be Walt's adoptive father, and that he is scared of the boy: "There's something about him. Sometimes, when he's around, things happen. He's different somehow."

Unusual occurrences have appeared around Walt. Just prior to his mother's death, Walt is studying from a book about native birds, and wants Brian to look at the entry for the Australian Bronze cuckoo. When Brian ignores him because Susan suddenly feels sick at that moment, Walt becomes insistent, and as he says "you're not looking," a bird suddenly smashes into the window because it 'wasn't looking' and dies.  It looks like the bird Walt was looking at in the book.

When Michael arrives in Australia to collect Walt, he doesn't take too well to him. Michael spares Walt's feelings by telling him that Brian wants to keep him, but it is up to Michael and he has decided to take him.  Michael also tells Walt that Brian said Walt could have his dog, Vincent.  

In "Exodus: Part 1", Michael and Walt stay in a hotel the night before the flight. Walt constantly disobeys Michael, comparing him to Brian, and attempts to leave with his dog, Vincent. Walt constantly gives Michael the cold shoulder at the airport, paying more attention to his video game instead.

===After the crash===

Walt quickly bonds with Locke after the crash, much to Michael's concern. Whilst looking for Vincent in the jungle, he discovers a pair of handcuffs. Due to Michael's willingness to help others, Walt is left under the care of different people, most noticeably Sun, who introduces him to her knowledge of herbal uses. Walt later moves into the caves, along with Michael. Walt is intriguied by Locke's hunting instincts, and constantly tries to sneak away with him, but to no avail. It is on one occasion when Walt sees Locke in the jungle throwing knives, and asks to practice with him. The next day, Walt sneaks away with Locke and Boone, and exhibits a natural talent in knife throwing. Michael soon arrives and is enraged, taking Walt away from them and forbidding him to see them. Annoyed, Walt disobeys him and speaks with Locke in the caves. Michael catches him and, as punishment, burns Walt's comic  book. Walt takes Vincent and leaves camp, heading into the jungle, where he encounters a polar bear. He is rescued by Michael and Locke.

Michael begins constructing a raft, and finishes it after a few days. However, Walt secretly sets alight to it, completely destroying it. Only Locke knows about this. Walt encounters Locke in the jungle days later, and notices the uncovered hatch. Walt then warns Locke not to open it, before running away. That night, after Michael recovers from his earlier poisoning, Walt confesses to burning the original raft, explaining that he didn't want to leave the island. However, after Michael proposes staying behind, Walt's mind suddenly changes and demands they leave. The next morning, Walt is the first to find Rousseau arriving on the beach. Later that day, he gives Vincent to a still-grieving Shannon before he leaves on the raft with Michael, Jin and Sawyer. That night, however, they encounter the Others. They destroy the raft and kidnap Walt.

Walt remains in captivity with the Others, but frequently appears to Shannon, particularly in "Abandoned"; however, no one believes her. In "Abandoned", Walt appears to Shannon shortly after Sayid leaves for a brief moment. He later appears to both of them the next day in the jungle. It is because of this that Shannon is shot by Ana Lucia.

In a mobisode it is revealed that at some point after he was taken off the raft, Walt was held in Room 23 at the Hydra compound by the Others. Walt posed a greater threat to them than they expected, as he had been doing something unspecified that frightened them so that they would not go in to see him. Ben responded to a particular situation with a blaring alarm and people in commotion, and Juliet suggested that Ben take responsibility and bring Walt back to Michael. Ben refused, saying Jacob wanted him there, and that Walt is important and special. After Ben denied Walt's dangerous nature, Juliet took him outside to show what Walt had done: a group of dead birds were lying on the stairwell beneath a boarded up window. 

As Michael is entering the numbers into the hatch, he unexpectedly receives a message, saying "Hello?". Michael begins a conversation with this person, but after introducing himself, he receives a message asking, "Dad?". Michael believes that this is Walt trying to communicate with him. Later, Michael receives instructions from this anonymous person that leads him to the Others. Michael is briefly reunited with Walt after he is brought to their camp. Walt reveals that he had been 'experimented' on, resulting in their meeting being cut short. Before being taken away, Walt hugs Michael. Later, Michael returns with Jack, Kate, Sawyer and Hurley, in an exchange for Walt and their freedom. Walt awaits in the boat (also given to Michael), and the two sail off.

Whilst off the island, Walt resides at his grandmother's house due to not wanting to speak or having anything to do with Michael after learning that he killed Ana-Lucia and Libby.  When Michael visits his mother's house with the hopes of speaking to Walt, he is told to leave but catches a glimpse of his son through the window.