'''Языковое планирование''' — лингвистический термин, используется также в интерлингвистике, имеет два значения:

#Сознательное воздействие на развитие любого этнические) языки в такой же степени подвергаются '''языковому планированию''', что и искусственные (точнее, плановые). Это воздействие может производиться как отдельными личностями (для русского языка такую роль сыграли, в частности, Карамзин, Ломоносов, Пушкин), так и государственными учреждениями и институтами (вопросы нормирования языка, создание терминологии, выработка литературных норм, создание письменности в случае младописьменных языков).
#Создание проекта планового языка. Как правило, в этом значении термин употребляется в интерлингвистике, наряду с термином лингвопроектирование.

==Организации==
''Список организаций, занимающихся языковым проектированием. Вы можете его дополнить''

:''This article is about the field of language planning & policy. See Constructed language for details on the creation of planned or artificial languages.''

'''Language planning''' refers to deliberate efforts to influence the behaviour of others with respect to the acquisition, structure, or functional allocation of language. Typically it will involve the development of goals, objectives and strategies to change the way language is used. At a governmental level, language planning takes the form of language regulatory bodies which are specifically charged with formulating and implementing language planning policies.

== Characteristics ==
The term ''language planning'' has often been identified with a third world context, being seen as a tool for the establishment of standardised national languages as a part of modernisation and nation building. In fact, language planning is neither a modern phenomenon nor is it confined to the third world.   

Language planning is not necessarily conducted at the national level. It can also be carried out by ethnic, religious or occupational groups. In the case of language communities that are divided by borders, language planning may also involve more than one country (on the governmental or non-governmental level) or international or regional bodies and conferences.

One international organization (based in the U.S.) that is involved in considerable amount of language planning around the world, especially for people with unwritten languages, is SIL International. 

Language planning can also go from the bottom up, such as the movement for non-sexist language in the U.S., which originated with grass-roots feminist groups, or the N'Ko movement in West Africa.

== Category ==
Language planning can be divided into three sub-dimensions: 