'''Замок Дандрум''' () находится в графстве Даун в Северной Ирландии. Изначально назывался '''Рат''' (), а современное название получил только в XVI в.

== История замка ==

Дандрум был построен знаменитым норманнским рыцарем Жаном де Корси, который около Ирландию, подчинил местные кланы и провозгласил себя графом Ольстера. Замок расположен на вершине холма и обращен южной стороной к долине Дандрум и живописному горному массиву Морн. Первоначально Дандрум представлял собой крепость типа motte and bailey — т.е. деревянную постройку на насыпном холме, окруженную частоколом, — но вероятно уже около 1180 г. вместо частокола была выстроена каменная стена.

В Валлийской марки, где донжоны подобной формы были широко распространены.

В 1210 г. Иоанн Безземельный лишил Гуго де Ласи титула и земель. Дандрум оставался в собственности короны до тех пор, пока де Ласи не было позволено в 1226 г. снова принять титул графа Ольстера. Вернувшись в Дандрум, Гуго вновь принялся за укрепление замка и построил усиленные парными башнями ворота. После смерти Гуго замок отошел в собственность короны.

thumb|right|250px|Dundrum Castle'''Dundrum Castle''' is a Norman castle, situated in the town of Dundrum, County Down, Northern Ireland. It was founded in 1177 by John de Courcy, following his invasion of Ulster. The castle, built to control access into Lecale from the west and south, stands on the top of a rocky hill commanding fine views south over Dundrum Bay and the Mourne Mountains, the lands west towards Slieve Croob and the plains of Lecale to the east. The Castle is a State Care Historic Monument in the townland of Dundrum, in Down District Council area, at grid ref: J4047 3700.<ref></ref>

==Origins and ownership==

thumb|The castle in 1791De Courcy's original castle may have had defences of earth and timber, but it is probable that the stone curtain wall of the upper ward was built as early as the 1180s. As with other early enclosure walls, there were no towers, but defence was assisted by covered walks along the outside wall-head. An early timber hall may have been sited near the keep, where there is a double-latrine in the curtain wall.

In 1204 de Courcy was expelled from Ulster by Hugh de Lacy who strengthened the castle with a massive round keep, probably employing master masons from the Welsh Marches, where such keeps were then popular. Although much of the second floor of this keep was rebuilt in the fifteenth century, it is clear from the survival of the old fireplace flue and spiral stair that it originally stood at least three storeys high. The basement was used for storage and had a cistern below the first floor, which appears to have been the great chamber for the lord's day-to-day living, while the floor above would have housed his private chamber.

The castle was captured by King John in 1210 and remained Crown property until de Lacy was allowed to return to his Earldom in 1226. It was probably during de Lacy's second tenure as Earl of Ulster (1227-43) that the twin-towered gatehouse, similar to the one at Pembroke Castle, was inserted in the curtain wall. It has a lopsided design with only one projecting tower to protect the approach along a narrow ramp from the south-west. 

The stone curtain wall of the outer bailey is likely to have been built by the Parliamentarians, who dismantled the castle in 1652 after they withdrew their garrison. 

After 1660 the Blundells returned and built a gabled L-shaped mansion in the south-west corner of the outer bailey. This dwelling was ruined by the time the property passed to the second Marquess of Downshire in the early nineteenth century, though the trees on the hill were probably planted at this time. The castle and grounds were placed in State Care by the seventh Marquess in 1954.