'''Abu Abdullah Musa ibn Mahdi al-Hadi'''
(Arabic: أبو عبد الله موسى بن المهدي الهادي) (d. September 14, 786) was an Abbasid caliph who succeeded his father Al-Mahdi and ruled from 785 until his death in 786.

Al-Hadi was the eldest son of Al-Mahdi and like his father he was very open to the people of his empire and allowed commoners to visit him in the palace at Baghdad to address him. As such, he was considered an enlightened ruler, and continued the progressive moves of his Abbasid predecessors.

His short rule was wreaked with numerous military conflicts. The revolt of Byzantine invasion. However, the Byzantines were turned back, and the Abbasid armies actually seized some territory from them.

Al-Hadi died in 786. al-Tabari notes varying accounts of this death, e.g. an abdominal ulcer or assassinated prompted  by al-Hadi's own mother. Al-Tabari (v. 30 p. 42f) notes al-Hadi's assertion of independence from his mother, his forbidding her further involvement in public affairs and his threatening Harun's succession. At Tabari says others refer to al-Hadi's overtures to Harun. One account at Tabari cites has al-Hadi attempting to poison his mother:

"Yahya b. al-Hasan related that his father transmitted the information to him, saying: I heard Kalisah telling al-'Abbas b. al-Fadl b. al-Rabi that Musa sent to his mother al-Khayzuran a dish of rice, saying, "I found this tasty and accordingly ate some of it, so you have some too!" Khalisah related: But I said to her, "Don't touch it until you investigate further, for I am afraid that it might contain something to your detriment." So they brought in a dog; it ate some and fell down dead. Musa sent to al-Khayzuran afterwards and said, "How did you like the dish of rice?" She replied, "I enjoyed it very much." He said, "You can't have eaten it, because if you had, I would have been rid of you. When was any Caliph happy who had a mother (still alive)?" (v. 30 pp. 43-44)

The note on p. 42 of volume 30 of the SUNY translation of at Tabari cites pp. 288-289 of the Kitab al-'Uyun for the possibility that al-Khayzuran feared al-Hadi would recover from his illness and thus had slave girls suffocate him. This note continues, "Certainly, his death appears as too opportune for so many people concerned that it should have been a natural one." The famous Muslim historian Ibn Khaldun discredited this claim.

== Character ==

'''Al-Hâdî Mûsâ ben al-Mahdî'''
<ref>arabe : al-hādī mūsā ben al-hadī,
</ref>surnommé '''Al-Hâdî'''
<ref>arabe : hādī,
, ''pacifique''</ref> est né en 776. Il succéda à son père Al-Mahdî comme Hârûn ar-Rachid lui succéda en 786.

== Histoire ==
Al-Hâdî était l'aîné des fils du calife Al-Mahdî. Il avait été désigné comme successeur devant son frère al-Rachîd qui était le préféré de leur mère al-Khayzurân. Au moment de la mort de leur père, Al-Hâdî était au Tabaristan à faire la guerre contre le gouverneur local en rébellion, alors que son frère Ar-Rachîd était à Bagdad. Ar-Rachîd et donna l’ordre de partir vers le Tabaristan pour remettre à al-Hâdî les insignes du califat. Les troupes stationnées à Bagdad refusèrent de prêter serment sur le nom d'Al-Hâdî si elles ne recevaient pas deux ans de solde en cadeau. Yahyâ Barmécide négocia est donna dix-huit mois de solde sur le champ. Al-Hâdî sembla très satisfait des initiatives de Yahyâ.

C’est sous le règne de Hâdî que des lettrés auraient essayé d’écrire un livre aussi parfait que la Coran. Ayant échoué dans leur tentative le mythe de l'inimitabilité et de la perfection littéraire du Coran s’est trouvé conforté.

Sous son règne aussi s'est développée une contestation religieuse radicale professant l'athéisme<ref>arabe : zandaqa,  , ''athéisme; hérésie; manichéisme; dualisme''</ref>. Al-Mahdî en avait fait périr un certain nombre, al-Hâdî les extermina tous.

Al-Khayzurân dominait son fils. Al-Hâdî essaya de se défaire de cette tutelle, il interdit aux courtisans de rendre visite à sa mère. Il essaya même de l’empoisonner. Lorsque al-Hâdî est mort, elle dit « ''C’est ce que je désirais.''<ref>Tabari, ''La Chronique (Volume II, L'âge d'or des Abbassides)'', p. 122</ref> ». La tradition dit qu'Al-Hâdî est mort en trois jours d’un abcès à l’estomac. D’autres disent qu’il est mort ivre étouffé par des esclaves payés par al-Khayzurân.