thumb|Das preisgekrönte 'River and Rowing Museum''.
'''David Chipperfield''' (* 1953 in London, England) ist ein englischer Architekt. 

== Leben ==
Ausgebildet wurde Chipperfield bei Richard Rogers und Norman Foster. Seit 1984 ist er selbständig. Er unterhält heute Büros in London, Berlin und Mailand, sowie eine Repräsentanz in Schanghai. 

Chipperfield war der einzige britische Architekt, der in die engere Wahl kam, den Auftrag zum Entwurf des Museums Davenport und das preisgekrönte ''River and Rowing Museum'' in Henley-on-Thames mit grüner Eichen-Fassade, Beton und Glas. Viele seiner Gebäude stehen allerdings im Ausland, insbesondere in Japan und Deutschland.

In Deutschen Literaturarchivs Marbach übergeben. 2007 wurde er dafür mit dem Stirling-Preis ausgezeichnet.

Er ist Gastprofessor am Staatlichen Akademie der Bildenden Künste Stuttgart und hat den Mies van der Rohe-Lehrstuhl an der Escola Tècnica Superior d'Arquitectura in Barcelona.

== Berliner Museumsinsel ==
1997 beauftragte die Museumsinsel und dem Wiederaufbau des Neuen Museums. Seit 2006 arbeitet er auch an der Durchgestaltung des von ihm entworfenen Eingangs- und Verteilergebäudes der Museumsinsel. Die architektonische Gesamtkonzeption dieser sogenannten James-Simon-Galerie stellte Chipperfield am 27. Juni 2007 der Öffentlichkeit vor.

thumb|right|280px|The award-winning [[River and Rowing Museum in Henley-on-Thames]]
'''David Chipperfield''' CBE (born 1953) is an English architect, born in London. He has offices in London, Berlin and Milan, and a representative office in Shanghai. Uncompromisingly modernist in outlook, his practice is driven by a consistent philosophical approach, rather than a 'house style'.

After receiving his Diploma from the Norman Foster and in 1984 established his own practice, David Chipperfield Architects. The practice currently has over 120 staff from 15 countries, and is working on a variety of projects in Europe, the United States and China.

In 1999, David Chipperfield was awarded the Tessenow Gold Medal.  In 2000 he was one of the architects to represent Britain at the CBE) for services to architecture, and was made Honorary Member of the Florence Academy of Art and Design in 2003.

David Chipperfield has taught architecture in Europe and the United States, and has lectured extensively on the work of the practice. In addition David Chipperfield held the Mies van der Rohe Chair at the Escola Tècnica, in Barcelona, Spain.

Chipperfield was the only British architect to be shortlisted for the commission to design Tate Modern.  He designed the award-winning River and Rowing Museum in Henley-on-Thames using green oak cladding, concrete and glass. However, many of his buildings are abroad, especially in Japan and Germany.  He has worked extensively in the United States, where in 2005, he completed the Figge Art Museum in Davenport, Iowa, as well as the Central Public Library in Des Moines, Iowa, commissioned in 2001. Current projects include the Anchorage Museum Expansion in Anchorage, Alaska.
He is a visiting professor at the University of the Arts London (formerly London Institute).

Chipperfield is the architect for the reconstruction of the destroyed Neues Museum in Berlin, due to reopen in 2009.  