'''Center''' (engl., zu deutsch „Mitte“) ist eine Positionsbezeichnung in der Sportart NBA-Maßstab eine Größe von sieben Fuß (213&nbsp;cm), weshalb Center auch „Sevenfooter“ genannt werden.

Die Aufgaben des Centers beschränken sich fast ausschließlich auf die Arbeit in der Zone, also direkt unter dem Korb. Der Center versucht aufgrund der Nähe zum Korb, Rebounds – also Abpraller vom Brett – zu holen, sowie in der Offensive leichte Punkte zu erzielen. Der Center steht dabei meist mit dem Rücken zum Korb, und verschafft sich eine gute Position, in dem er „aufpostet“ – also den Gegner mit dem eigenen Körper wegdrückt. Aus diesem Grund sind Center in der Regel sehr massig. Auch in der Defensive steht der Center direkt unter dem Korb. Durch seine Präsenz in der Zone verhindert er das Ziehen (der gegnerischen Flügel- und Aufbauspieler) zum Korb.

Die Spielweise der Center variiert stark zwischen der US-Profiliga NBA und den europäischen Ligen, die nach FIBA-Regeln spielen. Dort sind die Offensiv-Aufgaben eines Centers nicht in erster Linie auf die Zone beschränkt, was durch die Zonenverteidigung auch erheblich erschwert werden würde. Stattdessen zeichnen sich europäische Center in der Regel durch ein gutes Wurfgefühl aus der Distanz (bis hin zur Dreierlinie) aus. Zahlreiche europäische Center, die in die NBA wechselten, hatten daher anfangs Probleme, ihre Spielweise auf das NBA-typische Centerspiel umzustellen.

Die Centerposition ist für ein Basketballteam am schwersten zu besetzen, da wirklich exzellente Center-Spieler sehr selten sind. Dafür hat ein Team mit einem sehr guten Center dann den Vorteil, dass ihm fast alle anderen Mannschaften auf dieser Position deutlich unterlegen sind. Deshalb gewinnen in der Regel nur die Teams Meisterschaften, die einen dominanten Center haben – so z.B. die Minneapolis Lakers der 1950er Jahre, die Boston Celtics in den 1960er Jahren und nicht zuletzt die San Antonio Spurs heute.

== Geschichte ==
Bis 1936 gab es laut Basketball-Regelwerk nach jedem Korberfolg einen Sprungball an der Mittellinie. Um den Sprungball regelmäßig zu gewinnen, waren große, sprunggewaltige Spieler gefragt – der Beginn der Spezialisierung der Center. Doch nicht nur beim Sprungball waren große Leute im Vorteil. Auch in der Verteidigung beim Blocken von Würfen, beim Rebound holen, und im Angriff beim Werfen war Größe von Nutzen.

Die ersten dominanten Center waren knapp 1,80&nbsp;m bis 1,90&nbsp;m groß (womit sie kaum größer als heutige Point Guards waren). So war Ed Wachter, der als bester Center der 1910er gilt, etwa 1,85&nbsp;m groß. Moose Krause, der offensivstärkste College-Center der 1930er, maß nur 1,90&nbsp;m. Chris Leonard und Joe Lapchick, zwei Center der Original Celtics in den 1930ern und 1940ern, waren nur knapp über 1,92&nbsp;m. Tarzan Cooper von den New York Renaissance war ebenso groß. Center über 2,00&nbsp;m gab es zu dieser Zeit im Prinzip keine; Menschen dieser Größe galten gar als untauglich für Basketball.

Erst Anfang der 40er begann ein Trend hin zu größeren Centern. So erwies sich in der Verteidigung ein großer Center von Nutzen, der einen vom Gegner geworfenen Ball kurz vor dem Korb abfangen konnte (im englischen „goal tending“ genannt). Zu den Spielern, die dies besonders oft praktizierten gehörten George Mikan und Bob Kurland. Beide waren knapp 2,10&nbsp;m groß und sind damit die beiden ersten wirklichen „big men“ der Basketball-Geschichte. Wegen dieser beiden Spieler wurde schließlich 1944 das „goal tending“ verboten. Während Kurland nie in die NBA wechselte, begründete Mikan bei den Minneapolis Lakers die erste Meisterschafts-Dynastie, als er zwischen 1949 und 1954 fünf von sechs NBA-Titeln gewann. 

Um die Dominanz der Center, und damit in erster Linie die Dominanz Mikans einzuschränken, verbreiterte die NBA 1951 die Zone unter dem Korb, in welcher sich ein Spieler im Angriff nur drei Sekunden aufhalten darf, von drei auf sechs Meter. Den gewünschten Effekt hatte es nicht. Ein weiterer Vorteil sehr großer Spieler ist es, dass sie im Angriff den Ball von oben in den Korb drücken, neudeutsch dunken, können. Um dies zu ändern schlug man vor, den Korb von 3,05&nbsp;m (10 Fuß) auf 3,65&nbsp;m (12 Fuß) zu erhöhen – Pläne, die bei den Spielern auf große Ablehnung stießen und daher wieder verworfen wurden. In der NCAA wurde der Dunk allerdings für zehn Jahre (1967–76) verboten.

The '''center''', colloquially, the '''five''', is one of the standard positions in a regulation basketball game.  The center is normally the tallest on the team, and often has a great deal of strength and body mass as well.  A typical NBA center is 6'10" (2.08 m) or taller.

In many cases, the center's primary role is to use his or her size to score and defend from a position close to the basket.  A center who possesses size along with athleticism and skill constitutes an unparalleled asset for a team. The centers are also generally the players who are chosen to take jump balls.

Among current NBA players, Shaquille O'Neal of the Phoenix Suns is noted both for his enormous proportions, standing 7 ft 1 in (2.16 m) tall and weighing (officially) 325 lb (150 kg), as well for his mastery of elegantly simple post maneuvers.  Yao Ming of the Houston Rockets stands 7'6" tall; his persistence and shooting touch are exemplary.  Both have the awareness to make good passes when double-teamed. 

There has been occasional controversy over what constitutes a "true center".  Some examples include: Many have argued that power forward playing out of position, mainly because  his 6'9" (2.06 m) height makes him considerably smaller than most centers he faces.  Likewise, some would say that power forward, is actually a center, because of his size and style of play. In fact, he has been playing more minutes at the center position than the power position as of late. [http://www.82games.com/0708/07SAS17C.HTM]This is because it is believed that when Duncan entered the NBA, he played power forward in order to keep David Robinson playing as center and have two dominant big men on the floor. However, Duncan has continued to be listed as a power forward even after Robinson's retirement. Nonetheless, the judgment of whether a given player is a center or power forward is often highly subjective. Because there are currently so few people who meet the ideal size requirements of an NBA center, teams will sometimes find it necessary to play an individual at that position who would be more effective as a power forward.

It should also be noted that centers and power forwards often have low free throw percentages. Because of this, it is not uncommon for the opposing team to purposely foul and therefore send them to the line, especially late in games. This has been a common strategy used against certain centers who have continuously struggled with free throws; examples include Wilt Chamberlain, Shaquille O'Neal, and Ben Wallace. The technique of fouling a poor free throw shooter in order to win back possession in the hope that the player will (as usual) miss his free throws is sometimes known as the Hack-a-Shaq strategy. 

Centers are among the leaders in blocks and rebounds and are said to "anchor" defenses. It is common for centers to roam the paint, and therefore block a high numbers of shots, especially when their man does not have the ball.

The tallest player to ever be drafted in the NBA was the 7'8" Yasutaka Okayama from Japan but he didn't get any playing time. The tallest players to ever play in the NBA, at 7'7" (2.31 m) are centers Gheorghe Mureşan and Manute Bol (although Bol was said to be a few millimeters smaller). Standing at 7'2" (2.18 m), Margo Dydek is the tallest player in the history of the WNBA. She currently plays for the Connecticut Sun team.

==History of the center position==
===Emergence of the Center===
The center is considered a necessary component for a successful team, especially in professional leagues such as the NBA. Great centers have been the foundation for most of the dynasties in both the NBA and NCAA. The 6’10" NIT title, then, after turning professional, won seven National Basketball League, shot block; as a consequence, the NCAA, and later NBA, adopted the goaltending rule, and, in 1951, the NBA widened the foul lane, a decision known as the 'Mikan rule.'<ref>[http://www.nba.com/encyclopedia/finals/Mikan_v_Knicks.html NBA.com: George Mikan vs. The Knicks<!-- Bot generated title -->]</ref>

===1960s: The Era of Bill Russell and Wilt Chamberlain=== 
In the 1960s, MVP awards in the twelve year period between 1958 and 1969; played against one another in six Eastern Conference Finals and two NBA Finals between 1959 and 1969. Many of the records set by these two players have endured today. Most notably, Chamberlain and Russell hold the top eighteen season averages for rebounds.
<!-- Unsourced image removed: thumb|Bill Russell -->

University of San Francisco to two consecutive NCAA Championships (1955, 56). He joined the Boston Celtics and helped make them one of the greatest dynasties in NBA history, winning eleven championships over his thirteen-year career (1956-69) as well as five MVP awards. Russell revolutionized defensive strategy with his shot-blocking, rebounding and physical man-to-man defense. While he was never the focal point of the Celtics offense, much of the team's scoring came when Russell grabbed defensive rebounds and initiated fast breaks with precision outlet passes, primarily to point guard Bob Cousy.  As the NBA's first African-American superstar, Russell struggled throughout his career with the racism he encountered from fans in Boston, particularly after the 1966-67 season, when he became the first African-American in any major sport to be named player-coach.<ref>http://www.bostonsportsreview.com/200707_story_cover.asp</ref>
<!-- Unsourced image removed: thumb|Wilt Chamberlain -->

His principal rival, Kansas Jayhawks, leading them to the 1957 title game against the North Carolina Tar Heels. Although the Jayhawks lost by one point in triple overtime, Chamberlain was named the tournament's Most Outstanding Player. Briefly a member of the Most Valuable Player awards, including the distinction, in 1960, of being the first rookie to receive the award. Taller and stronger than any player of his era, he was usually capable of scoring and rebounding at will. Although he was the target of constant double- and triple-teaming, as well as fouling tactics designed to take advantage of his poor free-throw shooting, he set a number of records that have never been broken. Most notably, Chamberlain is the only player in NBA history to average more than 50 points in a season and score 100 points in a single game (both in 1961-62 as a member of the career rebounds (23,924).

A lesser-known center of the era was screen setter in the league, and his averages of 21.3 and 22.0 rebounds per game in 1966-67 and 1967-68, are exceeded only by Chamberlain and Russell.

===Centers in the 1970s and 1980s===
In contrast to the Celtics dynasty of the 1960s, the 1970s were a decade of parity in the NBA, with eight different champions and no back-to-back winners. At the college level, the UCLA Bruins, under Coach Lew Alcindor became eligible.  He led UCLA to three championships-in 1967, 68' and 69'-while winning the first Naismith College Player of the Year Award. During his college career, the NCAA enacted a ban on dunking primarily because of Alcindor's dominant use of the shot.<ref>[http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,836963,00.html Lew's Still Loose - TIME<!-- Bot generated title -->]</ref> His entrance into the NBA with the Milwaukee Bucks in 1969 was timely, as Bill Russell had just retired and Wilt Chamberlain was 33 years old and increasingly plagued by injuries. After leading the Bucks to the 1971 NBA championship, teamed up with legendary Point guard Oscar Robertson, Alcindor, who had converted to Islam, changed his name to Kareem Abdul-Jabbar. In 1975, Abdul-Jabbar was traded to the Los Angeles Lakers, and, after the arrival of Point guard Magic Johnson in 1980, formed part of a new Lakers dynasty that won five NBA titles (1980, 82', 85', 87', 88'). In addition, Abdul-Jabbar won six regular-season MVP awards (1971, 72', 74', 76', 77', 80'). At 7'2", 235 pounds, he lacked the strength of Chamberlain in his prime, but had a longer wingspan and ultimately proved more durable, adhering to a strict physical-fitness regiment that enabled him to play for twenty years, the longest career in NBA history at the time. Offensively, he was best known for his trademark 'Skyhook' hook-shot, almost impossible to block because of his height and wingspan. His career record of 38,387 points has yet to be broken.<ref>[http://www.nba.com/history/players/abduljabbar_bio.html NBA.com: Kareem Abdul-Jabbar Bio<!-- Bot generated title -->]</ref> Defensively, the 1973-4 season was the first in which the number of blocked shots were kept, and, over the next seven years, Kareem led the league in this statistic or finished second.<ref>[http://basketball-reference.com/players/a/abdulka01.html Kareem Abdul-Jabbar Statistics - Basketball-Reference.com<!-- Bot generated title -->]</ref>

Another product of John Wooden's UCLA program, Sixth Man Award. picks, a key element in the Knicks motion-oriented offense. The undersized but scrappy Dave Cowens, drafted at the recommendation of Bill Russell, helped the Boston Celtics win two more NBA titles, in 1974 and 1976. 

Leading centers of the late 1970s and early 1980s include Baltimore/Washington Bullets, ABA Mark Eaton of the 1980 for the top overall pick in the NBA Draft. Unseld led the Bullets to four NBA finals appearances and one championship, in 1978. Using his strength and determination to compensate for his lack of size (6 ft 7 in), he was famous for his rebounding, shotblocking, and bone-jarring picks. ABA career before joining the NBA's Chicago Bulls in 1976, playing there until he was traded to San Antonio in 1982, for whom he played until his retirement in 1987. He remains the NBA's career leader in field goal percentage (minimum 2000 shots made) with a 59.9 percentage.<ref>[http://www.nba.com/history/players/gilmore_summary.html NBA.com: Artis Gilmore Summary<!-- Bot generated title -->]</ref> Malone, the first high school player to turn professional, was drafted by the Bobby Jones, he won an NBA Championship in 1983, as well as a third League MVP. Never a dominant defender, his quickness and tenacity made him one of the best rebounders in NBA history, particularly on the offensive end; he led the league in rebounds six times in a seven-year period and still holds the NBA record for offensive rebounds. 

In the mid-1980s, the 7'4" Eaton was the most prolific shot-blocker in the league, and, although never a major offensive contributor, won two One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest'' because of his stoic demeanor, Parish was known for his trademark arching jump-shot—leading many experts to consider him the best medium-range shooting center of all time—and his ability to finish fast-breaks with his surprising speed. Playing until the age of 43, Parish broke Abdul-Jabbar's record for career games played.

===Centers in the 1990s===
Coach John Thompson, once a seldom-used backup to Georgetown Hoyas into the chief pipeline for talent at the Center position, producing a succession of great defensive big men in University of Houston, led by Hakeem Olajuwon, to win the NCAA championship. This matchup involved the two premier Centers of their generation. 