right|thumb|300px|Italian edition of ''Tree and Leaf''
"'''Leaf by Niggle'''" is a 39 and first published in the ''Dublin Review'' in January 1945. It can be found, most notably, in Tolkien's book titled ''Tree and Leaf'', and in other places (including the collections ''The Tolkien Reader'' and ''Tales from the Perilous Realm''). This is notable because the book, consisting of a seminal essay called "On Fairy-Stories" and "Leaf by Niggle," offers the underlying philosophy (Creation and Sub-Creation, see below) of much of Tolkien's fantastical writings. 

"Leaf by Niggle" is very much an allegory of Tolkien's own creative process, and, to an extent, of his own life.

==Plot summary==
In the story, an artist, named Niggle, lives in a society that does not much value paints a canvas of a great Tree with a forest in the distance. He invests each and every leaf of his tree with obsessive attention to detail, making every leaf uniquely beautiful. Niggle ends up discarding all his other artworks, or tacks them onto the main canvas, which becomes a single vast embodiment of his vision.

However, there are many mundane chores and duties that prevent Niggle from giving his work the attention it deserves, so it remains incomplete and is not fully realized. 

At the back of his head, Niggle knows that he has a great trip looming, and he must pack and prepare his bags. 

Also, Niggle's next door neighbour, a gardener named Parish, is the sort of neighbour who always drops by whining about the help he needs with this and that. Moreover, Parish is lame and has a sick wife, and honestly needs help — Niggle, having a good heart, takes time out to help.

And Niggle has other pressing work duties that require his attention. Then Niggle himself catches a chill doing errands for Parish in the rain.

Eventually, Niggle is forced to take his trip, and cannot get out of it. He has not prepared, and as a result ends up in a kind of institution, in which he must perform menial labour each day.

In time he is paroled from the institution, and he is sent to a place 'for a little gentle treatment'. But he discovers that the new country he is sent to is in fact the country of the Tree and Forest of his great painting, now long abandoned and all but destroyed (except for the one perfect leaf of the title which is placed in the local museum) in the home to which he cannot return — but the Tree here and now in this place is the true realization of his vision, not the flawed and incomplete form of his painting.

Niggle is reunited with his old neighbour, Parish, who now proves his worth as a gardener, and together they make the Tree and Forest even more beautiful. Finally, Niggle journeys farther and deeper into the Forest, and beyond into the great mountains that he only faintly glimpsed in his painting.

==Analysis==
A religious reading of ''Leaf by Niggle'' could lead to the conclusion that the allegory of "Leaf by Niggle" is life, death, purgatory and paradise. In this allegorical view, Niggle is not prepared for his unavoidable trip, as humans often are not prepared for death. His time in the institution and subsequent discovery of his Tree represent purgatory and heaven.

'''ニグルの木の葉'''（にぐるのこのは、原題：''Leaf by Niggle''）はJ・R・R・トールキンによる短編小説。
1945年に発表された。

== あらすじ ==
売れない絵描きのニグルは葉を描くことにかけては優れた才能を持っていた。しかし葉を描いているうちに世界が広がりだし、彼にとっては野心的すぎる規模にまでなってしまう。しかしそれは同時にニグルにとって描き切るべき「絵」と呼べるものでもあった。絵の世界は広がり、カンバスは継ぎ足されていく。そして様々な雑事による中断の末、制作の途上でニグルは旅に出なければならなくなる。

== 登場人物 ==
*ニグル（Niggle）</br>独り身の絵描き。お人好しで頼み事を断れない。名前は「こだわり過ぎる者」という意味。
*パリッシュ（Parish）</br>ニグルの隣人で片足が不自由な農夫。名前は「教区」という意味もある。
*駅員（the Porter）</br>旅に出たニグルが着いた駅の駅員。本来の意味なら「運搬人」。

==日本語訳==