El '''cas nominatiu''' és un cas gramatical per als noms. Alguns escriptors en llengua anglesa usen el terme '''cas subjectiu''' en lloc de nominatiu, per a remarcar les diferències entre el nominatiu bàsic i la manera com s'utilitza en anglès.

El nominatiu marca, generalment, el subjecte d'un verb o el seu atribut. El cas nominatiu es troba al grec, entre altres llengües. En català, el nominatiu només es reflecteix, com els altres casos llatins, en els pronoms personals (''jo, tu, ell/ella, nosaltres, vosaltres, ells/elles''). Quant a la primera i la segona persona del plural, la terminació "-altres" és característica del nominatiu i s'afegí durant l'Edat Mitjana quan feien de subjecte. D'aquí l'oposició nosaltres/nos i vosaltres/vos.

El nominatiu és la forma més comú i natural per a certes parts de la parla, tals com els noms, adjectius, pronoms i menys sovint els numerals i els participis, i a vegades no indiquen cap relació especial amb altres parts del discurs. Per tant, en algunes llengües el cas nominatiu no està marcat, és a dir, és l'arrel de la paraula mateixa.

En llengües nominatives absolutives, el cas nominatiu marca el subjecte d'un verb transitiu o el subjecte voluntari d'un verb intransitiu, però no un subjecte involuntari d'un verb intransitiu (pel qual s'utilitza el cas absolutiu).

Nominatiu

ang:Nemniendlic cāsus

The '''nominative case ''' is a subject of a object or other verb arguments.
(Basically, it is a noun that is doing something, usually joined (such as in Latin) with the accusative case.)

== Explanation ==

The nominative case is the usual, natural form (more technically, the ''least marked'') of certain parts of speech, such as nouns, adjectives, pronouns and less frequently numerals and participles, and sometimes does not indicate any special relationship with other parts of speech. Therefore, in some languages the nominative case is unmarked, that is, the  form or stem, with no lemma; that is, it is the one used to cite a word, to list it as a dictionary entry, etc.

Nominative cases are found in German, Icelandic, Old English, Polish, and Russian, among other languages. English still retains some nominative pronouns, as opposed to the accusative case or oblique case: ''I'' (accusative, ''me''), ''we'' (accusative, ''us''), ''he'' (accusative, ''him''), ''she'' (accusative, ''her'') and ''they'' (accusative, ''them'').  An archaic usage is the singular second-person pronoun ''thou'' (accusative ''thee'').  A special case is the word ''you'': Originally ''ye'' was its nominative form and ''you'' the accusative, but over time ''you'' has come to be used for the nominative as well.

The term "nominative case" is most properly used in the discussion of Greek, and most modern Western European languages.

In active-stative languages there is a case sometimes called nominative which is the ''most'' marked case, and is used for the subject of a transitive verb or a voluntary subject of an intransitive verb, but not for an involuntary subject of an intransitive verb; since such languages are a relatively new field of study, there is no standard name for this case.

===Subjective Case===

Some writers of English employ the term '''subjective case''' instead of nominative, in order to draw attention to the differences between the "standard" generic nominative and the way it is used in English.

Generally, when the term subjective case is used, the accusative and dative are collectively labelled as the objective case. This is possible in English because the two have merged; there are no surviving examples where the accusative and the dative are distinct in form, though their functions are still distinct. The genitive case is then usually called the ''possessive'' form and often is not considered as a noun case per se; English is then said to have two cases, the subjective and the objective.  This view is an oversimplification, but it is didactically useful.