{{מלחין
|שם=
|שם תמונה=Schuhmann.jpg|
|כיתוב תמונה=<small>דיוקן משנותיו המאוחרות</small>
|תאריך לידה=8 ביוני 1810
|מקום לידה=צוויקאו, גרמניה
|תאריך פטירה=29 ביולי 1856
|מקום פטירה=אנדניך, גרמניה
|תקופה/זרם=רומנטית
|מספר יצירות ידוע=149
}}
'''רוברט אלכסנדר שומאן''' (פסנתרן ומבקר מוזיקלי גרמני. שומאן היה אינטלקטואל ואסתטיקן אשר היה מעורה בתחומי האמנויות השונים ובעיקר בתחום הספרות. הוא היה אחד המייצגים הבולטים של התקופה הרומנטית. יצירתו המאוד אישית שאבה את יסודותיה ממקורות הבארוק והתקופה הקלאסית אך עם זאת שברה מוסכמות מוזיקליות ופרצה רבות מן המסגרות שהיו נהוגות במוזיקה בתקופתו.

==חייו==
נולד ב-1810 כילדם החמישי של אוגוסט ויוהאנה שומאן ובגיל שבע החל את לימודיו בנגינה בפסנתר. בגיל עשר כבר הופיע לראשונה בפני קהל. את נסיונותיו הראשונים בהלחנה ערך בשנת 1822, בהיותו בן 12. שומאן התעניין, בצד המוזיקה, בתחום הספרות, ובשנת 1825 יסד יחד עם עשרה חברים מספסל הלימודים מועדון ספרות.

בשנת 1828, בהיותו בן 18, סיים שומאן את לימודיו בליצאום בהצטיינות וקיבל אות כבוד מהמוסד. לאחר טיול, במהלכו פגש במינכן את המשורר היינריך היינה, החל שומאן ללמוד משפטים בלייפציג. באותה שנה פגש את הפסנתרן פרידריך ויק, אשר זיהה את כשרונו וראה בו פסנתרן וירטואוז לעתיד. בעידודו של הפטרון החדש לא מוותר שומאן על הקריירה המוזיקאלית ומתאמן ברצינות לקראת קריירה של פסנתרן קונצרטים וירטואוזי במקביל ללימודי המשפטים. מפאת העומס הרב מבין שומאן שעליו לקבל החלטה ובהיותו בן 20 מבקש מאמו רשות, ומקבל אותה, לנטוש את לימודי המשפטים על מנת להתמקד בנגינה. פרידריך ויק לוקח את שומאן תחת חסותו ומציע לו לעבור לגור עימו בביתו על-מנת שיוכל להתרכז בנגינה. 
שמאל|ממוזער|250px|פסלו של שומן בצוויקאו
בשנת 1830 מתפתחת באחת מאצבעות ידיו פגיעה כרונית, שתמנע ממנו את המשך הקריירה כפסנתרן. טיבה ומקורה של המחלה אינם ברורים. יש הטוענים כי הפגיעה נגרמה עקב שימוש במכשיר מיוחד שפיתח שומאן עצמו על מנת לנסות לפתח את גמישות האצבעות. טענה אחרת גורסת כי הפגיעה נגרמה עקב טיפול תרופתי שקיבל כנגד מחלת העגבת.

ב-1831 יוצר שומאן את "אֵיזביוס" ו"פלורסטאן" -  שתי דמויות דמיוניות מנוגדות (זה הראשון מופנם וחולמני ואילו השני נמרץ וערני) אשר בהן ישתמש לאפיין קטעים שונים במוזיקה שלו. שומאן קרא בפירוש לחלק מהקטעים שכתב בשמות הדמויות המייצגות מוטיבים, ואף חתם בשמן מאמרים שכתב. כשנה מאוחר יותר מחמירה הפציעה באצבעו וזו הופכת משותקת לחלוטין. שומאן מבין כי עליו לוותר על קריירת המְבצע ולהתמקד בהלחנה. הגולל שנסתם על יעודו כפסנתרן ושני מקרי מוות משפחתיים באותה שנה מערערים את מצבו הנפשי של שומאן המבצע, בחודש אוקטובר 1833 נסיון התאבדות בקפיצה מהחלון.

בשנת ווינה. הנסיון נכשל ושומאן חזר כעבור כמה חודשים ללייפציג.

באותן שנים, התאהב שומאן בקלארה ויק, בתו של מורו לפסנתר ופטרונו, הצעירה ממנו בתשע שנים. בין השניים החלה להתפתח מערכת יחסים, למורת רוחו של ויק, שניסה להפריד ביניהם. נישואין ללא הסכמת ההורים לא היו באותה תקופה דבר שבשגרה ושומאן נאלץ לפתוח במאבק משפטי מול האב על-מנת לשאת את בחירת ליבו לאישה. בשנת 1840 איפשר בית המשפט לשומאן ולקלארה להתחתן ללא רשות אביה. השניים נישאו בספטמבר של אותה שנה ב-Schönfeld, ליד לייפציג. 

בהיותו בן 33 החל שומאן ללמד קומפוזיציה, קריאת פרטיטורות ונגינה פסנתר בקונסרבטוריון מנדלסון בלייפציג. בשנת 1844 עורכים שומאן ואישתו טיול ברוסיה. באותה שנה מוכר שומאן את עיתונו לפרנץ ברנדל ובחודש דצמבר של אותה שנה הוא מעתיק את מקום מגוריו לדרזדן.

ב-1854 ביצע שומאן נסיון התאבדות נוסף, הפעם בקפיצה לנהר הריין, נסיון שיסמן את תחילתה של ההדרדרות הבריאותית והנפשית במצבו שתוביל למותו. שומאן ביקש לאחר נסיון ההתאבדות להתאשפז במוסד לחולי נפש, שם הכריז רופאו כי העגבת היא מקור כל תחלואיו הגופניים והנפשיים. שומאן נפטר ב-29 ביולי 1856, ככל הנראה כתוצאה מהרעלת כספית, בה השתמשו לטיפול כנגד עגבת. הוא נקבר בבון ובשנת 1880 הוקם לכבודו פסל בדמותו על הקבר.

==משפחתו==
אביו של שומאן נפטר בהיותו בן 16, בחודש אוגוסט של שנת מתאבדת בטביעה אחותו אמילי. שבע שנים מאוחר יותר, בשנת 1833 נפטרים אחיו יוליוס וגיסתו רוזאלי. זו גם השנה בה ביצע שומאן את נסיון ההתאבדות.

שומאן נישא, כאמור, לקלארה ויק בעקבות המאבק המשפטי ובשנת 1841 נולד ילדם הראשון. במהלך 13 השנים הבאות יוולדו לזוג שבעה ילדים נוספים.

<!--NB: THE DATES IN THE MAIN TEXT ARE NON-AUTOFORMATTED-->thumb|250px|Robert Schumann
'''Robert Schumann''',<ref>Daverio, Grove online.  According to Daverio, there is no evidence of a middle name "Alexander" which is given in some sources.</ref> sometimes given as Robert Alexander Schumann,<ref>Scholes, page 932.</ref> (June 8, 1810 &ndash; July 29, 1856) was a German Romantic composers of the 19th century.

He had hoped to pursue a career as a symphonies, an choral and chamber works. His writings about music appeared mostly in the ''Neue Zeitschrift für Musik'' ("The New Journal for Music"), a Leipzig-based publication that he jointly founded.

In 1840, after a long and acrimonious legal battle with his piano instructor Clara Wieck, a considerable figure of the Clara Wieck's father. Clara Wieck showcased many works by her husband as well. For the last two years of his life, after an attempted suicide, Schumann was confined to a mental institution.

==Biography==
===Early life===
Schumann was born in Saxony the fifth and last child of the family.<ref>Ostwald, page 11</ref> His father was a bookseller, and his boyhood was spent in the cultivation of literature quite as much as it was spent in music.  Schumann himself said that he had begun to compose before the age of seven.
thumb|200px|left|House where Schumann was born
At the age of 14, he wrote an essay on the aesthetics of music and also contributed to a volume, edited by his father, titled "Portraits of Famous Men". While still at school in Zwickau he read the works of the German poet-philosophers Byron and the Greek tragedians.  His most powerful and permanent literary inspiration was Jean Paul, whose influence is seen in Schumann's youthful novels ''Juniusabende'', completed in 1826, and ''Selene''.

Schumann's interest in music was piqued as a child by the performance of Ignaz Moscheles playing at Carlsbad, and he developed an interest in the works of Beethoven, Franz Schubert and Felix Mendelssohn later. His father, however, who had encouraged the boy's musical aspirations, died in 1826, and neither his mother nor his guardian would encourage a career for him in music.  In 1828 he left school, and after a tour, during which he met Heinrich Heine in Munich, he went to Leipzig to study law.  In 1829 his law studies continued in Heidelberg.

===1830–1834===
During Easter, 1830 he heard Frankfurt. In July he wrote to his mother, "My whole life has been a struggle between Poetry and Prose, or call it Music and Law."  By Christmas he was back in Leipzig, taking piano lessons from his old master, Friedrich Wieck who assured him that he would be a successful concert pianist.

During his studies with Wieck, Schumann permanently injured his right hand.  One suggested cause of this injury is that he damaged his finger by the use of a mechanical device designed to strengthen the weakest fingers, which held back one finger while he exercised the others.  Others have suggested that the injury was a side-effect of syphilis medication.  A more dramatic idea is that in an attempt to increase the independence of his fourth finger, he may have carried out a surgical procedure to separate the tendons of the fourth finger from those of the third.  Whatever the cause of the injury, Schumann abandoned ideas of a concert career and devoted himself instead to composition.  To this end he began a course of theory under Heinrich Dorn, the conductor of the Leipzig opera.  About this time he considered composing an opera on the subject of Hamlet.

====''Papillons''==== 
The fusion of the literary idea with its musical illustration, which may be said to have first taken shape in ''Papillons'' (op. 2), is foreshadowed to some extent in the first criticism by Schumann, an essay on Frédéric Chopin's variations on a theme from Mozart's ''Don Giovanni'', which appeared in the ''Allgemeine musikalische Zeitung'' in 1831. Here the work is discussed by the imaginary characters Florestan (the embodiment of Schumann's passionate, voluble side) and Eusebius (his dreamy, introspective side) – the counterparts of Vult and Walt in Jean Paul's novel ''Flegeljahre.'' A third, Meister Raro, is called upon for his opinion. Raro may represent either the composer himself, Wieck's daughter Clara, or the combination of the two (Cla'''ra''' + '''Ro'''bert).
thumb|250px|left
However, by the time Schumann had written ''Papillons'' in 1831 he went a step further.  The scenes and characters of his favorite novel had now passed definitely and consciously into the written music, and in a letter from Leipzig (April 1832) he bids his brothers "read the last scene in Jean Paul's ''Flegeljahre'' as soon as possible, because the ''Papillons'' are intended as a musical representation of that masquerade."

In the winter of 1832 Schumann visited his relations at Schneeberg, where he performed the first movement of his Symphony in G minor. In Zwickau, the music was played at a concert given by Wieck's daughter Clara, who was only eleven then. (Born 13 Sept 1819) On this occasion Clara played bravura Variations by Herz, a composer who Schumann was already opposing as a philistine. (See his musical Journal) It was also on this occasion that Robert's mother said to Clara, "You must marry my Robert one day." (Berthold Litzmann 1910) The G minor Symphony was never published by Schumann, but has been played and recorded since then. The death of his brother Julius as well as that of his sister-in-law Rosalie in 1833 seems to have affected Schumann with a profound melancholy, leading to his first apparent attempt at suicide.

====''Die neue Zeitschrift für Musik''==== 
By the spring of 1834, Schumann had sufficiently recovered to inaugurate ''Die Mozart, Beethoven and Weber, while he also promoted the work of some contemporary composers, including Chopin (who did not like Schumann's work)<ref>Vladimir Asheknazy's notes, Favourite Chopin</ref> and Berlioz, whom he praised for creating music of substance.  On the other hand, Schumann disparaged the school of Liszt and Wagner.  Amongst his associates were the composers Ludwig Schunke, the dedicatee of Schumann's ''Toccata in C'', and Norbert Burgmüller.

Schumann's editorial duties, which kept him occupied during the summer of 1834, were interrupted by his relations with Ernestine von Fricken, a girl of 16, to whom he became engaged. She was the adopted daughter of a rich Bohemian, from whose variations on a theme Schumann constructed his own ''Symphonic Etudes''. The engagement was broken off by Schumann, due to the burgeoning of his love for the 15-year-old Clara Wieck. Flirtatious exchanges in the spring of 1835 led to their first kiss on the steps outside Wieck’s house in November and mutual declarations of love the next month in Zwickau, where Clara appeared in concert. Having learned in August that Ernestine von Fricken’s was of illegitimate birth, which meant that she would have no dowry, and fearful that her limited means would force him to earn his living like a ‘day-labourer’, Schumann engineered a complete break towards the end of the year. But his idyll with Clara was soon brought to an unceremonious end. When her father became aware of their nocturnal trysts during the Christmas holidays, he summarily forbade them further meetings.

====''Carnaval''==== 
thumb|300px|right|Robert Schumann in 1839.
''Carnaval'' (op. 9, 1834) is one of Schumann's most genial and most characteristic piano works.  Schumann begins nearly every section of ''Carnaval'' with the musical notes signified in German by the letters that spell Asch (A, E-flat, C, and B, or alternatively A-flat, C, and B; in German these are A, Es, C and H, and As C and H respectively), the town (then in David against the Philistines in which may be heard the clear accents of truth in contest with the dull clamour of falsehood embodied in a quotation from the seventeenth century ''Grandfather's Dance''. In ''Carnaval'', Schumann went further than in ''Papillons'', for in it he himself conceived the story for which it was the musical illustration.

===1835–39=== 
On October 3, 1835, Schumann met Mendelssohn at Wieck's house in Leipzig, and his appreciation of his great contemporary was shown with the same generous freedom that distinguished him in all his relations to other musicians, and which later enabled him to recognize the genius of Johannes Brahms, whom he first met in 1853 before he had established a reputation.

In 1836 Schumann's acquaintance with Clara Wieck, already famous as a pianist, ripened into love.  A year later he asked her father's consent to their marriage, but was refused.

In the series ''Fantasiestücke'' for the piano (op. 12) he once more gives a sublime illustration of the fusion of literary and musical ideas as embodied conceptions in such pieces as ''Warum'' and ''In der Nacht''.  After he had written the latter of these two he detected in the music the fanciful suggestion of a series of episodes from the story of Hero and Leander. The collection begins (in Des Abends) with a notable example of Schumann's predeliction for rhythmic ambiguity, as unrelieved syncopation plays heavily against the time signature just as in the first movement of ''Faschingsschwank aus Wien''. After a nicely told fable, and the appropriately titled "Whirring Dreams," the whole collection ends on an introspective note in the manner of Eusebius.
thumb|250px|left|Clara Schumann, "One of the most soulful and famous pianists of the day", said Edvard Grieg 

The ''Kinderszenen'', completed in 1838, a favourite of Schumann's piano works, is playful and childlike, and in a wonderfully fresh way captures the innocence of childhood. The ''Träumerei'' is one of the most famous piano pieces ever written, and exists in myriad forms and transcriptions, and has been the favourite encore of several artists, including Vladimir Horowitz. Although deceptively simple, Alban Berg, in reply to charges that modern music was overly complex, pointed out that this piece is in no way as simple as it appears in its harmonic structure. The whole collection is deceptive in its simplicity, yet genuinely touching and refreshing.

The ''Kreisleriana'', which is considered one of his greatest works, was also written in 1838, and in this the composer's fantasy and emotional range is again carried a step further.  Johannes Kreisler, the romantic poet brought into contact with the real world, was a character drawn from life: the poet E. T. A. Hoffmann (q.v.), and Schumann utilized him as an imaginary mouthpiece for the sonic expression of emotional states, in music that is "fantastic and mad".  

The ''Fantasia in C'' (Op. 17), written in the summer of 1836, is a work of passion and deep pathos, imbued with the spirit of late Beethoven. This is no doubt deliberate, since the proceeds from sales of the work were initially intended to be contributed towards the construction of a monument to Beethoven. According to Liszt, (Strelezki: ''Personal Recollections of Chats with Liszt'') who played the work to the composer, and to whom the work was dedicated, the Fantasy was apt to be played too heavily, and should have a dreamier (''träumerisch'') character than vigorous German pianists tended to labour. He also said, "It is a noble work, worthy of Beethoven, whose career, by the way, it is supposed to represent."<ref>Anton Strelezki:  ''Personal Recollections of Chats with Liszt.'' London, 1893.</ref>

After a visit to Schubert's previously unknown ''Symphony No. 9 in C'', in 1839 Schumann wrote the ''Faschingsschwank aus Wien'', i.e. the Carnival Prank from Vienna. Most of the joke is in the central section of the first movement, into which a thinly veiled reference to the “Marseillaise”—then banned in Vienna—is squeezed. The festive mood does not preclude moments of melancholic introspection in the Intermezzo.

In 1840, after a long and acrimonious legal battle with her father, Schumann married Clara Wieck on September 12, 1840, at Schönefeld.

===1840–49===  

Before 1840, Schumann had written almost exclusively for the piano, but in this one year he wrote 168 songs.  Schumann's biographers have attributed the sweetness, the doubt and the despair of these songs to the varying emotions aroused by his love for Clara.  This view is treated with skepticism by some modern scholars, especially since Dichterliebe, with its themes of rejection and acceptance, was written when his marriage was no longer in doubt. Robert and Clara were to have seven children.
thumb|200px|right 

His chief song-cycles of this period were his settings of the ''J. von Eichendorff (op. 39), the ''Frauenliebe und -leben'' of Chamisso (op. 42), the ''Dichterliebe'' of Heine (op. 48) and ''Myrthen'', a collection of songs, including poems by Goethe, Rückert, Heine, Byron, Burns and Moore.  The songs ''Belsatzar'' (op. 57) and ''Die beiden Grenadiere'' (op. 49), each to Heine's words, show Schumann at his best as a ballad writer, though the dramatic ballad is less congenial to him than the introspective lyric.
The opus 35 (to words of Justinus Kerner) and opus 40 sets, although less well known, also contain songs of lyric and dramatic quality.
 <blockquote>As Grillparzer said, "He has made himself a new ideal world in which he moves almost as he wills".</blockquote>

Despite his achievements, Schumann received few tokens of honour; he was awarded a doctoral degree by the University of Jena in 1840, and in 1843 a professorship in the Conservatorium of Leipzig, which had been founded that year by Felix Mendelssohn. On one occasion, accompanying his wife on a concert tour in Russia, Schumann was asked whether 'he too was a musician'. He was to remain sensitive to his wife's greater international acclaim as a pianist.

In 1841 he wrote two of his four symphonies. The year 1842 he devoted to the composition of chamber music, which included the piano quintet (op. 44), now one of his best known and most admired works. In 1843 he wrote ''Paradise and the Peri'', his first essay at concerted vocal music.  After this, his compositions were not confined during any particular period to any one form.

The stage in his life when he was deeply engaged in his music to Goethe's ''Dresden, where he suffered from what was referred to as persistent “nervous prostration”. As soon as he began to work he was seized with fits of shivering and an apprehension of death, which was exhibited in an abhorrence for high places, for all metal instruments (even keys), and for drugs.  Schumann's diaries also state that he suffered perpetually from imagining that he had the note A sounding in his ears. In 1846 he had recovered and in the winter revisited Vienna, traveling to Prague and Berlin in the spring of 1847 and in the summer to Zwickau, where he was received with enthusiasm--gratifying because Dresden and Leipzig were the only large cities in which his fame was at this time appreciated.

To 1848 belongs his only opera, ''Genoveva'' (op. 81), a work containing much beautiful music, but lacking dramatic force. It is interesting for its attempt to abolish the recitative, which Schumann regarded as an interruption to the musical flow.  The subject of ''Genoveva'', based on Johann Ludwig Tieck and Hebbel, was in itself not a particularly happy choice; but it is worth remembering that as early as 1842 the possibilities of German opera had been keenly realized by Schumann, who wrote, "Do you know my prayer as an artist, night and morning?  It is called 'German Opera'.  Here is a real field for enterprise [...] something simple, profound, German".  And in his notebook of suggestions for the text of operas are found amongst others: ''Nibelungen'', ''Lohengrin'' and ''Til Eulenspiegel''.  Schumann's consistently flowing melody in this work can be seen as a forerunner to Wagner's ''Melos''.

The music to Byron's ''Weimar, Liszt, as always giving unwearied assistance and encouragement.  The rest of the work was written in the latter part of the year, and the overture in 1853. This overture Schumann described as "one of the sturdiest of my creations".