{{Infobox Person
| name        = Nelson Eddy
| image       = Nelson Eddy in Sweethearts trailer.jpg
| image_size  = 240px
| caption     = from the film ''Sweethearts'' (1938)
| birth_name  = Nelson Ackerman Eddy
| birth_date  = 
| birth_place = Providence, Rhode Island
| death_date  = 
| death_place = Sans Souci Hotel, Palm Beach, Florida
| death_cause = Cerebral hemorrage
| resting_place = Hollywood Forever Cemetery
| resting_place_coordinates = 
| residence   = 
| nationality =
| other_names = 
| known_for   = 
| education   = 
| employer    = 
| occupation  = Baritone, film star
| title       = 
| salary      = 
| networth    = 
| height      = 
| weight      = 
| term        = 
| predecessor = 
| successor   = 
| party       = 
| boards      = 
| religion    = 
| spouse      = Ann Denitz Franklin
| partner     = Jeanette MacDonald
| children    = 
| parents     = William Darius and Isabel Eddy nee Kendrick
| relatives   = 
| signature   = 
| website     = 
| footnotes   = 
}}

'''Nelson Ackerman Eddy''' (American singer who appeared in 19 musical films during the 1930s and 1940s, as well as in opera and on the concert stage, radio, television, and in nightclubs.  Although he was a classically trained baritone, he is best remembered for the eight films in which he costarred with soprano Jeanette MacDonald.

During his 40-year career, he earned three stars on the Hollywood Walk of Fame (one each for film, recording, and radio), left his footprints in the wet cement at Grauman's Chinese Theater, earned three Gold records, and was invited to sing at the third inauguration of President Franklin Delano Roosevelt.  He also introduced millions of young Americans to classical music and inspired many of them to pursue a musical career.

== Family Background ==

Nelson Ackerman Eddy was born in Providence, Rhode Island, the only child of William Darius Eddy and Isabel Kendrick Eddy.  His father was a machinist and toolmaker whose work required him to move from town to town. Nelson grew up in Providence and Pawtucket, Rhode Island, and in New Bedford, Massachusetts.  As a boy, he was a redhead and quickly acquired the nickname "Bricktop."  As an adult, his red hair was streaked with silver, so that his hair photographed as blond. 

Nelson came from a musical family. His Atlanta-born mother was a church soloist, and his grandmother, Caroline Ackerman Kendrick, was a distinguished oratorio singer. His ancestry on his mother's side of the family was Russian Jewish<ref>His ancestry may not have been Russian Jewish after all.  Tobey, Barbara W. (1988) "The Ackerman Family, Volume II": 222 contains information on the family of Joseph Chandler Ackerman and his wife Sophia Belinda Van B[e]uren, including their daughter Caroline Netta Ackerman (born 1854).  This family lived in Mobile, Alabama which is consistent with what other references ([http://www.jeanetteandnelson.net/biography/nelson/ne-maternal.htm for example]) have stated about the family.  This new view of his maternal ancestry takes a number of his ancestral lines back to days when New York was known as New Amsterdam</ref>, while he was New England English on his father's side. His father, William Darius Eddy, occasionally moonlighted as a stagehand at the Providence Opera House, sang in the church choir, played the drums, and performed in local productions such as ''H.M.S. Pinafore''.

Eddy's parents divorced when he was 14. Eddy moved with his mother to Philadelphia, where her brother, Clark Kendrick, lived. His uncle helped Eddy secure a clerical job at the Mott Iron Works, a plumbing supply company. He later worked as a reporter with the ''Philadelphia Press'', the ''Evening Public Ledger'' and the ''Philadelphia Evening Bulletin''. He also worked briefly as a copywriter at N.W. Ayer Advertising, but was dismissed for constantly singing on the job.

==Early singing background==
Throughout his teens, Eddy studied voice and imitated the recordings of baritones like Titta Ruffo, Scotti, Amato, Campanari, and Werrenrath. He gave recitals for women's groups and appeared in society theatricals, usually for little or no pay.

His first professional break came in 1922 when he was singled out by the press after an appearance in a society theatrical, ''The Marriage Tax'', although his name had been omitted from the program. 

In 1924, Eddy won the top prize in a competition that included a chance to appear with the Philadelphia Opera Society. Alexander Smallens, musical director of the Philadelphia Civic Opera and later assistant conductor of the Philadelphia Orchestra, became interested in Eddy's career and coached him.  (In a 1936 career profile of Eddy put out by Arthur Judson Concert Management, Smallens is credited with Nelson's "operatic success.") 

By the late 1920s, Eddy was appearing with the Philadelphia Civic Opera Company and had a repertoire of 28 operas, including Amonasro in ''Aida'', Marcello in ''La bohème'', Papageno in ''The Magic Flute'', Almaviva in ''The Marriage of Figaro'', both Tonio and Silvio in ''Pagliacci'', and Wolfram in ''Tannhäuser''. (William von Wymetal was the group's producer at this time, in association with Fritz Reiner who later directed the Philadelphia Symphony Orchestra.) Eddy also performed in Gilbert & Sullivan operettas with The Savoy Company at the Broad Street Theatre in Philadelphia.

Eddy studied briefly with the noted teacher David Scull Bispham, a former Metropolitan Opera singer, but when Bispham died suddenly, Eddy became a student of William Vilonat. In 1927, Eddy borrowed some money and followed his teacher to Dresden for European study, which was then considered essential for serious American singers. He was offered a job with a small German opera company. Instead, he decided to return to America, where he concentrated on his concert career, making only occasional opera appearances during the next seven years. In 1928, his first concert accompanist was a young pianist named Theodore (Ted) Paxson, who became a close friend and remained his accompanist until Eddy's death 39 years later.

In the early 1930s, Eddy's principal teacher was Naughty Marietta''. In his later years, Eddy frequently changed teachers, constantly trying new vocal techniques. He also had a home recording studio where he studied his own performances. It was his fascination with technology that inspired him to record three-part harmonies (soprano, tenor, baritone) for his role as a multiple-voiced singing whale in the animated Walt Disney feature, "The Whale that Sang at the Met", the concluding sequence in the 1946 feature film ''Make Mine Music''. 

With the Philadelphia Civic Opera, Eddy sang in the only American performance of ''Feuersnot'' by Richard Strauss (December 1 1927) and in the first American performance of Strauss's ''Ariadne auf Naxos'' (November 1 1928) with Helen Jepson. In ''Ariadne'', Eddy sang the roles of the Wigmaker and Harlequin in the original German. He performed under Leopold Stokowski as the Drum Major in the second American performance of Alban Berg's ''Wozzeck'' on November 24 1931. 

At Carnegie Hall in New York, Christmas 1931, he sang in the world premiere of ''Maria Egiziaca'' (Mary in Egypt), unexpectedly conducted by the composer Ottorino Respighi himself when famed conductor Arturo Toscanini fell ill at the last minute. Years later, when Toscanini visited the MGM lot in California, Eddy greeted him by singing a few bars of ''Maria Egiziaca''.

Eddy continued in occasional opera roles until his film work made it difficult to schedule appearances the requisite year or two in advance. Among his final opera performances were three with the San Francisco Opera in 1934, when he was still “unknown.” Marjory M. Fisher of the ''San Francisco News'' wrote of his December 8 1934 performance of Wolfram in ''Tannhäuser'', “Nelson Eddy made a tremendously fine impression....he left no doubt in the minds of discerning auditors that he belongs in that fine group of baritones which includes Lawrence Tibbett, Richard Bonelli, and John Charles Thomas and which represents America's outstanding contribution to the contemporary opera stage.”  He also sang Amonasro in ''Aida'' on November 11 1934 to similar acclaim. Elisabeth Rethberg, Giovanni Martinelli, and Ezio Pinza were in the cast. However, opera quietly faded from Eddy's schedule as films and highly lucrative concerts claimed more and more of his time.

When he resumed his concert career following his screen success, he made a point of delivering a traditional concert repertoire, performing his hit screen songs only as encores. He felt strongly that audiences needed to be exposed to all kinds of music.

== Hollywood ==
Eddy was "discovered" by Hollywood when he substituted at the last minute for the noted diva, Lotte Lehmann, at a sold-out concert in Los Angeles on February 28 1933. He scored a professional triumph with 18 curtain calls, and several film offers immediately followed. After much agonizing, he decided that being seen on screen might boost audiences for what he considered his “real work,” his concerts. (Also, like his machinist father, he was fascinated with gadgets and the mechanics of the new talking pictures.) Eddy's concert fee rose from $500 to $10,000 per performance.

Eddy signed with Pete Smith short, ''Handlebars''. He appeared and sang one song each in ''Broadway to Hollywood'' and ''Dancing Lady'', both in 1933, and ''Student Tour'' in 1934. Audience response was favorable, and he was cast as the male lead opposite the established star Jeanette MacDonald in a film version of Victor Herbert's 1910 operetta ''Naughty Marietta''.

''Naughty Marietta'' was the surprise hit of 1935. Its key song, “Ah! Sweet Mystery of Life,” became a hit and earned Eddy his first Oscar as Best Picture, received the ''Photoplay'' Gold Medal Award as Best Picture, and was voted one of the Ten Best Pictures of 1935 by the New York film critics. Critics singled out Eddy for praise: 

* “A new star emerged on the Capitol screen.” - ''New York Daily News''. 

* “The screen has found a thrilling thrush, possessed not only of a rare vocal tone, but of a personality and form and features cast in the heroic mould.” - ''New York American''. 

* “Eddy is a brilliant baritone, masculine, engaging and good looking.” - Richard Watts, Jr., in the ''New York Herald.'' 

Eddy appeared in seven more MGM films with Jeanette MacDonald:

''Rose Marie'', 1936, is probably his most-remembered film. Eddy sang “Song of the Mounties” and “Indian Love Call” by Rudolf Friml. His definitive portrayal of the steadfast Mountie became a popular icon, frequently spoofed in cartoons and TV skits, and even generating travesties on stage (''Little Mary Sunshine'', 1959) and film (''Dudley Do-Right'', 1999). When the Mounties retired their classic red jackets and hat in 1970, hundreds of newspapers accompanied the story with a photo of Nelson Eddy as Sgt. Bruce in ''Rose Marie'', made 34 years earlier. 

''Maytime'', 1937, is regarded as one of Eddy's best films. “Will You Remember” by Sigmund Romberg brought Eddy another Gold Record. ''The New York Times'' thought ''Maytime'' “the most entrancing operetta the screen has given us….it affirms Nelson Eddy's preeminence among the baritones of filmdom.” 

''The Girl of the Golden West'' (1938) had an original score by Sigmund Romberg and reused the David Belasco stage plot also employed by Giacomo Puccini for ''La Fanciulla del West''.

right|thumb|250px|Eddy and MacDonald from the trailer for ''[[Sweethearts (film)|Sweethearts'' (1938)]]

''Sweethearts'', 1938, was MGM's first three-strip Technicolor feature, incorporating Victor Herbert's 1913 stage score into a modern script by Dorothy Parker. It won the Photoplay Gold Medal Award as Best Picture of the Year.

''New Moon'', 1940, based on Sigmund Romberg's 1927 Broadway hit, became one of Eddy's most popular films. His key songs were “Lover, Come Back to Me,” “Softly as in a Morning Sunrise,” “Wanting You” and “Stout Hearted Men”.

''Viennese singing teacher who elopes with his pretty English pupil and takes her to live in Vienna.

''I Married an Angel'', 1942, adapted from the Rodgers and Hart stage musical about an angel who loses her wings on her wedding night, suffered from censorship problems. Eddy sang “Spring Is Here” and the title song.

Nelson Eddy also starred in films with other leading ladies:

''Rosalie'', 1937, with Eleanor Powell, offered a score by Cole Porter. In his first solo-starring film, the script called for Eddy to portray a football-playing West Point pilot who pursues a princess-in-disguise to Europe. Eddy recorded the title song.

''Let Freedom Ring'', 1939, with Western. Eddy got to beat up rugged Oscar winner freedom and the American way from bad guys, a popular theme just before World War II.

''Russian Revolution. The title song became one of his standards.

'''Nelson Ackerman Eddy''' (* 29. Juni 1901 in Providence, Rhode Island; † 6. März 1967 in Miami Beach, Florida) war ein US-amerikanischer Opernsänger und Filmdarsteller. Seine größte Popularität erlangte Eddy durch acht gemeinsame Filmauftritte mit Jeanette MacDonald, mit der er in den 1930er und 1940er Jahren ein festes Leinwandpaar bildete.

== Leben und Arbeit ==
Nelson Eddy studierte schon als Kind Gesang und 1924 siegte er in einem Wettbewerb und erlangte damit die Möglichkeit, vor der ''Philadelphia Opera Society'' aufzutreten. Der Dirigent der ''Philadelphia Civic Opera'', Alexander Smallens, begann Eddy auszubilden und zu fördern. Ende der 1920er Jahre trat Eddy mit der ''Philadelphia Civic Opera Company'' auf und sang ein breites Repertoire von 28 Opernrollen, darunter ''Gilbert & Sullivan produzierte.

Eddy studierte kurze Zeit bei David Scull Bispham, um später zu William Vilonat zu wechseln. 1927 ging er gemeinsam mit seinem Lehrer nach Dresden, das unter amerikanischen Sängern damals als unerlässliche Ausbildungsstation galt. Ein Engagementangebot bei einer kleinen deutschen Oper lehnte Eddy dann jedoch ab und kehrte in die Vereinigten Staaten zurück, wo er in den folgenden sieben Jahren eine Konzertkarriere verfolgte und nur selten auf Opernbühnen auftrat. 1928 wurde Theodore (Ted) Paxson sein Klavierbegleiter und Freund. Die enge Zusammenarbeit hatte bis zu Eddys Tod Bestand.

Der Sänger wechselt auch in späteren Jahren häufig seine Lehrer und probierte immer wieder neue Gesangstechniken. In seinem Wohnhaus betrieb er ein Aufnahmestudio, in dem er seine eigenen Auftritte studierte. Die Aufnahmetechnik faszinierte ihn so sehr, dass zu Walt Disneys Animationsfilm ''The Whale Who Wanted to Sing at the Met'' (Make Mine Music) selbst entwickelte Drei-Stimmen-Harmonien (Sopran, Tenor, Bariton) beitrug.

=== MGM (1933-1942) ===
Die Filmindustrie in Hollywood wurde auf Nelson Eddy aufmerksam, als er in einem ausverkauften Konzertsaal in Los Angeles am 28. Februar 1933 in letzter Minute als Ersatz für Lotte Lehmann einsprang. Auf seinen Auftritt folgten 18 Vorhänge und mehrere Filmangebote. Eddy unterzeichnete einen siebenjährigen Vertrag mit Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, der ihm pro Jahr drei Monate Konzertreisen ermöglichte. Konzertauftritte wurden für Eddy mit dem Filmruhm zunehmend lukrativ; auf Opernbühnen hingegen sang er nur noch vereinzelt. Eddy gab sein Debut 1933 in ''Dancing Lady'', einem Revuefilm, der das populäre Duo Joan Crawford und Clark Gable herausstellte. Der Tänzer Fred Astaire hatte in dem opulenten Streifen ebenfalls seinen ersten Auftritt im Tonfilm. 

Die Produzenten von MGM wussten zunächst nicht, was sie mit Eddy anfangen sollten, setzten im ersten Film lediglich seine Stimme ein und ließen ihn auch in den folgenden nur für einzelne Lieder auftreten. Da das Publikum darauf günstig reagierte, erhielt Eddy 1935 neben New York Film Critics zu einem der zehn besten Filme des Jahres 1935 gewählt.

MGM produzierte in den folgenden Jahren sieben weitere Filme mit dem Leinwandpaar MacDonald/Eddy. Das Publikum reagierte positiv auf die meist sehr aufwändig produzierten Operetten. Zu den größten Erfolgen gehörten ''Rose-Marie'' von 1936, in dem Eddy die beiden populären Lieder ''Song of the Mounties'' und ''Indian Love Call'' singt. 

Den größten finanziellen Erfolg hatten die beiden Stars 1937 mit dem Film ''Maytime'', der im Milieu des zweiten französischen Kaiserreichs spielt und als eine der besten Produktionen mit Nelson Eddy gilt. Der Song ''Will You Remember'' brachte ihm eine weitere Goldene Schallplatte ein. ''The Girl of the Golden West'' (1938) war eine Adaption von Giacomo Puccinis Oper ''La fanciulla del West''.

''Sweethearts'' von 1938 war der erste Film, den MGM im Drei-Streifen-Technicolor-Verfahren produzierte. Der Film, der die Abenteuer eines jungen Künstlerpaares am Broadway und in Hollywood erzählt und Photoplay Award gewann, basierte auf einem Bühnenstück von Victor Herbert, das Dorothy Parker in einen modernen Stoff verwandelt hatte. 

Nelson Eddy trat in den Jahren auch mit anderen Hauptdarstellerinnen auf, so in ''Rosalie'' mit Met-Sängerin Risë Stevens erschien Eddy darin in einer Doppelrolle.

Es dauerte bis 1940, ehe die beiden Sänger erneut mit ''New Moon'', der Adaption eines Musicals von Sigmund Romberg auf die Leinwand zurückkehrten. Im selben Jahr drehten die beiden noch ''Bitter Sweet'', eine in Technicolor produzierte Filmversion der gleichnamigen Operette von Noel Coward. Nach dem finanziellen Reinfall von ''I Married an Angel'' beschlossen beide Stars, ihre Verträge mit MGM zu kündigen.

=== Spätere Filme (1943-1947) ===
1942 verließen Nelson Eddy und Jeanette MacDonald MGM. 1943 unterzeichnete Eddy bei Universal einen Vertrag für 2 Filme: ''Phantom der Oper'' und ''Follow the Boys''. Dem aufwändig in Technicolor produzierten Filmmusical ''Phantom der Oper'' lagen neben dem bekannten Roman von Gaston Leroux Songs von Edward Ward zugrunde. Eddy trat darin neben Susanna Foster und Claude Rains auf, war mit dem Film anschließend aber so unzufrieden, dass er die laufenden Dreharbeiten für ''Follow the Boys'', in dem er erneut an der Seite von Jeanette MacDonald zu sehen gewesen wäre, abbrach und die Universal verließ.

Für seine letzten Filme ging Eddy bei wechselnden Produktionsgesellschaften unter Vertrag. ''Knickerbocker Holiday'' beruhte auf einem populären Musical von RKO diese Sequenz 1954 als Kurzfilm erneut heraus. In seinem letzten Kinofilm, dem Western ''Outpost'' trat Eddy erneut neben Ilona Massey auf.

=== Schallplattenaufnahmen ===
Von 1935 bis 1964 spielte Nelson Eddy mehr als 290 Schallplatten ein, darunter Songs aus seinen Filmen, Opernarien, Operetten- und Volkslieder und Schlager. In den Jahren 1935-1938 waren Eddy und MacDonald bei RCA Victor gemeinsam unter Vertrag, was es ihnen ermöglichte, auch die populären Duette aus ihren gemeinsamen Filmen einzuspielen. 1938 unterzeichnete Eddy einen Vertrag bei Columbia Records, der die Schallplattenvermarktung diese Duette beendete. Erst 1957 kam noch einmal eine von Eddy und MacDonald gemeinsame besungene Schallplatte heraus. 