'''Universidade Federal do Ceará''' (UFC) is a federal university with campuses in the cities of Fortaleza, Sobral and Barbalha, in the state of Ceará, Brazil. UFC is a public and tuition-free university, with several academic programs in most areas of knowledge. 

In Fortaleza, the university has three main campuses: "Campus do Pici", with the most of the programs in science and technology areas, "Campus do Benfica", which harbors the university's administration and the programs in humanities, business, and the law school, and the "Campus do Porangabussu", with the medical school. The campuses of Sobral and Barbalha are new and have only a medical school each, which are extensions of the central medical school at Fortaleza.

==History==

UFC was created by the Brazilian federal government in 1955 and is under the Ministry of Education. The University was born as the result of great public debate, which had begun on 1949. The main character of this movement was Antônio Martins Filho, an intellectual who became the first director of the recently created "Universidade do Ceará" ('University of Ceará'). The University itself was created by Law #2.373, ratified on December of 1954 and began to function on June 25, 1955. Its implementation was owed to the union of the several higher education institutes then present in the city of Fortaleza: the School of Agronomy, the Faculty of Law of Ceara, the Faculty of Medicine and the Faculty of Pharmacy & Odontology. Today, the University consists of four centers of basic science and education and five professional colleges.

L''' 'Universidade Federal do Ceará''' (UFC) est une université brésilienne dont les campus sont localisés dans les villes de Sobral et Barbalha, dans l'Etat de Ceará du Brésil. 

À Fortaleza, l'université a trois principaux campus: 
* "Campus-EPIC", assurant la plupart des programmes de science et technologie, 
* "Campus-Benfica", qui abrite l'université de gestion et les facultés littéraires et de sciences humaines et la faculté de droit, 
* "Campus-Porangabussu", avec l'école de médecine. Les campus de Sobral et Barbalha sont des nouveaux sites et ont seulement une école de médecine de chacun, qui sont des extensions de l'école de médecine à Fortaleza. 

== Histoire == 

UFC a été créée par le gouvernement fédéral brésilien en 1955 et relève du Ministère de l'éducation. L'Université est née à la suite d'un grand débat public, qui avait commencé en 1949. Le personnage principal de ce mouvement était Antonio Martins Filho, un intellectuel qui est devenu le premier directeur de la toute nouvelle "Universidade do Ceará". L'Université elle-même a été créé par la loi n ° 2.373, ratifiée en Décembre 1954 et a commencé à fonctionner le 25 Juin 1955.  