'''Golo Mann''' (født tysk historiker, forfatter og filosof.

Han var sønn av forfatteren Thomas Mann og hans jødisk-tyske kone Katja Pringsheim. Golo Mann hadde en trist barndom, der han følte at foreldrene ikke likte ham. Han var homoseksuell, men snakket aldri offentlig om det.

Fra 1927 til 1932 studerte han filosofi og historie i München, Berlin og Heidelberg, hvor han tok doktorgraden under Karl Jaspers.

I 1933 emigrerte han til Sveits, og senere til Frankrike. Her var han lektor i tysk historie ved Ecole Normale Supérieure i St. Cloud, og ble senere dosent i Rennes. Fra 1937 til 1940 var han redaktør i Zürich. Dette året flyktet han med sin onkel Heinrich Mann til Spania, og derfra til USA. Her var han professor i historie ved flere universiteter fra 1942 frem til 1958. Samme år ferdigstilte han sin ''Deutsche Geschichte des 19. und 20. Jahrhunderts'', som ble et standardverk. Han dro tilbake til Europa det året. Han ble knyttet til universitetet i Stuttgart (politisk historie), men Max Horkheimer og Theodor W. Adorno forhindret at han fikk en stilling som professor i Hessen. 

Siden 1961 arbeidet Golo Mann på tibindsverket Propyläen-Weltgeschichte, som ble ferdig 1964. I 1965 ble han æret med Schillerprisen i Mannheim og mottok senere en rekke andre priser. I 1971 skrev han en kjent Wallenstein-biografi.

'''Golo Mann''' (German historian, essayist and writer. He was the third child of the novelist Thomas Mann and his wife Katia Mann. 

==Life==
Mann was born in Monika, Elisabeth and Michael.

In her diary his mother describes him in his early years as sensitive, nervous and frightened.<ref>Golo Mann, ''Erinnerungen und Gedanken. Eine Jugend in Deutschland'', Frankfurt-am-Main 1986, p. 10f.</ref> His father hardly concealed his disappointment and rarely mentioned the son in his diary. Golo Mann in turn described him later: "Indeed he was able to radiate some kindness, but mostly it was silence, strictness, nervousness or rage."<ref>ibid., p. 41.</ref> Among his siblings he was most tightly connected with Klaus, whereas he disliked the dogmatism and radical views of his sister Erika.<ref>Urs Bitterli, ''Golo Mann. Instanz und Außenseiter'', Reinbek 2005, p. 620.</ref>

As an average pupil he received a classical education at the Wilhelms-Gymnasium in Munich beginning in September 1918, revealing talents in Boy Scouts in spring 1921 . On one of the holiday marches he was the victim of a slight homosexual violation by his group leader.<ref>ibid., p. 113f.</ref>

New horizons opened up in 1923, when Mann entered the boarding school in Salem, feeling liberated from home and enjoying the new educational approach. Here, in the countryside near Lake Constance, he developed an enduring passion for hiking through the mountains, although he suffered from a lifelong knee injury.

In 1925 Mann suffered a severe mental crisis that overshadowed the rest of his life: "In those days the doubt entered my life, or rather: broke in with tremendous power (…) I was seized by darkest melancholy."<ref>ibid., p. 193–197</ref>

Upon the final school exams in 1927, he commenced his studies of law in Munich, moving the same year to French in Paris and to get to know “real work“ during six weeks in a coal mine in Lower Lusatia, abruptly stopping because of new knee injuries.<ref>ibid., Chapter ''Eine neue Erfahrung'' (a new experience), pp. 265–278.</ref>

At last Mann entered the University of Heidelberg in spring 1929. Here he followed the advice of his teacher Karl Jaspers to graduate in Philosophy on the one hand and to study History and Latin with the prospect of becoming a schoolteacher on the other. He nevertheless found the time to join a socialist student group in the autumn of 1930 . In May 1932  Mann finished his dissertation, ''Concerning the terms of the individual and the ego in Hegel‘s works'', which was rated with an average ''cum laude''. Nevertheless his parents bought him a small car that he used for extended rides across Germany.<ref>ibid., pp. 430, 462ff</ref>
Golo Mann intended to finish his university studies in Hamburg and Göttingen, but dark clouds were arriving over Germany. That was especially the case for Thomas Mann, who never hesitated to articulate his dislike for so-called National Socialism, and for his family. While his parents already lived abroad, Golo Mann looked after the family house in Munich in April 1933 , helped his three younger siblings leave the country and brought the greater part of his parents‘ savings via Karlsruhe and the German embassy in Paris to Switzerland.

On May 31, 1933, Mann left Germany for the French town of Bandol near Toulon. He spent the summer at the mansion of the American travel writer William Seabrook near Sanary-sur-Mer<ref>Marjorie Worthington, ''The Strange World of Willie Seabrook'', Harcourt Brace and World 1966, p. 123</ref> and lived six further weeks at the new family house in Küsnacht near Zurich. In November he joined the École Normale Supérieure at Saint-Cloud near Paris for two ''intensive, instructive years''<ref>Golo Mann, Erinnerungen und Gedanken. Lehrjahre in Frankreich, Frankfurt-am-Main 1999, p. 129.</ref> as lecturer on the German language. At that time he worked for the emigrants‘ journal ''Die Sammlung'' (''The Collection'') founded by his brother Klaus.

In November 1935 Mann accepted a call from the University of Rennes to lecture on German language and literature. Many travels to Switzerland prove that the relationship to his father was easier, because in the meantime Thomas Mann had learned to appreciate his son‘s political knowledge. But it was only when Golo Mann helped edit his father‘s diaries in later years that he realised fully how much acceptance he had gained.<ref>Urs Bitterli, Golo Mann. ''Instanz und Außenseiter'', Reinbek 2005, p.547.</ref> In a confidential note to the German critic Marcel Reich-Ranicki he wrote, "It was inevitable that I had to wish his death; but I was completely broken-hearted when he passed away."<ref>ibid., p. 548.</ref>

In 1936 Thomas Mann and his family were deprived of their German citizenship. Help came from the Czech businessman and admirer Rudolf Fleischmann, who arranged the naturalization to his Bohemian town of Prosec and subsequently Czech citizenship. Golo Mann wanted to take the opportunity to continue his studies in Prague, but soon stopped the experiment.<ref>ibid., p. 66f.</ref>

Early in 1939 Mann traveled to Princeton, New Jersey, where his father worked as guest professor. Although war was drawing closer, he hesitantly returned to Zurich in August to become editor of the emigrants‘ journal ''Maß und Wert'' (Measure and Value).

As a reaction to invasion of Paris in May 1940 during Alma Mahler-Werfel and New York in October on board the Greek steamer ''Nea Hellas''.

In the United States Golo Mann, for the time being, was condemned to inactivity. He stayed at his parents‘ house in Princeton, then in New York, before moving with them in 1941  to Pacific Palisades, California. In the autumn of 1942  he finally got the chance to teach history at Olivet College in Michigan.

As did his brother Klaus Mann before, Golo Mann joined the US Army in 1943. After basic training at Fort McClellan, Alabama, he worked at the Office of Strategic Services in Washington, DC. In his capacity as intelligence officer it was his duty to collect and translate relevant information.

In April 1944 he was sent to London where he made radio commentaries for the German language division of the American Broadcasting Station. For the last months of World War II he worked in same function for a military propaganda station in Luxemburg.  Then he helped organise the foundation of Radio Frankfurt. During this period he worked with Robert Lochner, who thought very highly of him.  During his journeys across Germany he was shocked at the extent of destruction, especially that cause by the Allies' bombardment.

In 1946 Mann left the US Army by his own request. He nevertheless kept a job as civil control officer, watching the war crimes trials at English of the 19th century diplomat Friedrich von Gentz.

In autumn 1947, Mann became assistant professor of History at Claremont Men‘s College in California. In hindsight he recalled the nine-year engagement as "the happiest of my life"; on the other hand he complained, "My students are scornful, unfriendly and painfully stupid as never before."<ref>ibid., p. 140f.</ref> The professorship in California was interrupted by several residences in German-speaking Europe.