thumb|left|К. Н. Леонтьев. Фотография 1880-х годов
'''Константи́н Никола́евич Лео́нтьев''' (1831—1891) — русский мыслитель: философ, писатель, литературный критик, публицист и дипломат, вдохновителей мрачной реакции, поздний славянофил.

== Биография ==

Родился 13 (25) января Калужской губернии. Константин — младший, седьмой по счету ребенок в семье Леонтьевых.

В 1841—1849 годах Леонтьев получает среднее образование в гимназии, которую заканчивает с правом поступления в университет без экзаменов.

В ноябре 1849 года Леонтьев поступает на медицинский факультет Московского Императорского Университета, досрочно окончив который в 1854 году, отправляется добровольцем в Крым в качестве батальонного лекаря.

В 1857 году увольняется с военной службы и возвращается в Москву. В 1859—1860 гг. Леонтьев занимает место домашнего врача в поместье барона Розен (Нижегородская губерния).

В конце Министерство Иностранных Дел, получив должность секретаря русского консульства на острове Салониках.

В Афоне, а затем в Константинополе и на острове Варшаве, занимая должность редактора газеты «Цензурный Комитет, где прослужил шесть лет.

right|frame|Konstantin Leontiev, a Russian philosopher

'''Konstantin Nikolayevich Leontyev''' () (conservative, monarchist reactionary Russian philosopher who advocated closer cultural ties between Russia and the East in order to oppose the catastrophic egalitarian, utilitarian and revolutionary influences from the West. He advocated Russia's cultural and territorial expansion eastward to India, Tibet, and China.

==Biography==

Leontiev was born and grew up on his father's estate.  His father, a nobleman, was a military officer who was discharged due to "riotous behavior."  Despite this fact, due to the intervention of Russian Empress Leontiev's brothers were able to enter imperial Corps of Pages.  He was engaged at the age of twenty-three but broke off this relationship for the sake of "freedom and art," a decision that made things difficult for him.  After completing medical school in Moscow Leontiev saw service as a doctor during the Crimean War.  In 1861, he carried off a local Crimean girl, the daughter of a Greek merchant, from Feodosia, eventually marrying her.  

He later lived in various Ottoman towns as a Russian consular agent, devoting his leisure time to writing oriental fiction on many themes, some of which implied that he may have been bisexual and his condemnation of Virgin Mary, he was cured of cholera and dysentary and promised Her that he would take monastic vows.  Later that fall he moved to the Russian monastery on Mount Athos.  In 1880, he moved to the censorship department in Moscow, where he published several acclaimed analyses of Leo Tolstoy's novels. Seven years later, he secretly took the tonsure at the Optina monastery, famous for its startsy. He died as a monk in the Troitse-Sergiyeva Lavra.

==Works and political thought==

Leontiev's most remarkable book is a volume of West's decline by several decades, Leontiev proposed that all societies undergo a state of flowering and increasing complexity followed by one of "secondary simplification".  Leontiev felt that the West had reached the latter stage.