'''John Rich''' (1692 - 1761) est un important metteur en scène et directeur de théâtre londonien du . Ayant créé le New Theatre (« Nouveau Théâtre ») de Lincoln's Inn Fields en 1714, il y monta des productions toujours plus extravagantes. Il introduisit la pantomime dans le théâtre anglais et tint lui-même le rôle d'un Arlequin muet et dansant de 1717 à 1760 sous le nom de scène de « Lun ». Son théâtre se spécialisait dans ce que les contemporains appelaient alors le « spectacle » et que l'on appellerait aujourd'hui les effets spéciaux. Il s'efforçait d'inclure dans ses mises en scène de véritables coups de canons, des animaux, et de nombreuses simulations de batailles. 

En 1728 Rich mit en scène l'Opéra des gueux (''Beggar's Opera'') de John Gay. La pièce eut un tel succès que l'on disait alors qu'elle avait « rendu Gay riche et Rich gai ». En 1732, Rich ouvrit le Théâtre Royal de Covent Garden, aujourd'hui connu sous le nom de Royal Opera House.

thumb|Cette gravure de [[William Hogarth|Hogarth, intitulée « A Just View of the English Stage » , montre Colley Cibber répétant une nouvelle farce à Drury Lane pour faire concurrence à John Rich.]] 
Au cours de sa carrière de producteur et de metteur en scène Rich livra de nombreuses batailles contre des directeurs de théâtres rivaux, notamment Colley Cibber. Dans son ''Apology'', Cibber  rend Rich responsable de la dégradation et des coûts exorbitants des productions théâtrales de l'époque. Les satiristes étaient toutefois d'accord pour penser que Cibber était tout aussi coupable que Rich, et les enfants de Cibber pousuivirent dans les traces de leur père, comme John Rich continua le style de son père, en l'exagérant. Le théâtre de Drury Lane de Cibber et ceux de Rich à Lincoln's Inn (puis à Covent Garden) furent en concurrence pendant toute l'existence de Rich, au point qu'à deux reprises les deux théâtres montèrent la même pièce simultanément : ''Roméo et Juliette'' et ''Le Roi Lear'' en 1756 et 1757. La compagnie de Rich mit également en scène certaines pièces de Shakespeare rarement jouées, comme ''Cymbeline''. 

thumb|right|John Rich in a print c.1750
'''John Rich''' (1692 - 1761) was an important director and theatre manager in 18th century London.  He opened the New Theatre at Lincoln's Inn Fields (1714) and began putting on ever more lavish productions.  He introduced pantomime to the English stage and played a dancing and mute Harlequin himself from 1717&ndash;60 under the stage name of "Lun."  His theatre specialized in what contemporaries called "spectacle."  Today we might call them "special effects."  His stagings would endeavour to present actual cannon shots, animals, and multiple illusions of battle. 

By 1728, Rich was synonymous with lavish (and successful) productions.  Dunciad Variorum'' of 1732, he makes John Rich the angel of the goddess Dulness:
:Immortal Rich! how calm he sits at ease
:Mid snows of paper, and fierce hail of pease;
:And proud his mistress' orders to perform,
:Rides in the whirlwind, and directs the storm." (III l. 257-260)
The battle between Cibber's Drury Lane and Rich's Lincoln's Inn Fields Pope summarizes as, 
:"Here shouts all Drury, there all Lincoln's-Inn;
:Contending Theatres our (Dulness's) empire raise,
:Alike their labours, and alike their praise."
Yet, at the same time, 1728 was the year that Rich produced John Gay's ''Beggar's Opera'', and the play ran so successfully that it was famously said the play "made Gay rich and Rich gay."  John Gay was a long time friend of Pope's and a frequent collaborator of his.  In 1732, Rich opened the Theatre Royal Covent Garden, the first of three theatres on the site, now known as the Royal Opera House.

thumb|left|200px|"Rich's Glory": John Rich takes over (seemingly invades) his new Covent Garden Theatre. ([[William Hogarth|Hogarth caricature)]]
Rich received a 75% share in the Lincoln's Inn Fields theatre from his father, Christopher Rich, upon his death in 1714.  By that point, Rich had already begun acting in plays and taking a hand in the theatrical management.  His father had set the reputation and direction of the Lincoln's Inn Theatre during the War of the Theatres in the 1690s, and John Rich continued it.  In particular, John Rich exaggerated the theatricality of the Restoration spectacular by creating a new form of hireling drama designed strictly to generate opulent stagecraft.  After becoming majority owner of Lincoln's Inn Fields, his control grew as he sought to get the rest of the shares. It was the success of ''Beggar's Opera'' that allowed him, in the end, to open the new theatre at Covent Garden.

During his time as producer and director, Rich had multiple battles with his acting companies and rival managers, including Colley Cibber.  In Cibber's ''Apology,'' he blames the degradation and skyrocketing costs of play productions on Rich.  The general opinion of satirists was that Cibber was thoroughly as guilty as Rich, and the Cibber children went on to carry forth the habits of their father, just as John Rich carried forth and exaggerated the habits of his.  Cibber's Drury Lane and Rich's Lincoln's Inn (and then Covent Garden) theatres were in competition throughout Rich's lifetime.  Indeed, the two theatres twice put on the same play at the same time, with ''Romeo and Juliet'' and ''King Lear'' in 1756-7. Rich's company also staged a number of rarely-seen Shakespearean plays, among them ''Cymbeline''. 