== Press ==
The Swedish Press is self-regulated through the Public Press Ombudsman, or ''Allmänhetens Pressombudsman'' and the Swedish Press Council, or ''Pressens Opinionsnämnd''. One example of this is that Swedish media follow a principle of not disclosing the identities of suspected criminals. There was some controversy when Dagens Nyheter on 27 September 2003 published the name and picture of Mijailo Mijailović, who was the suspected assassin of Swedish foreign minister Anna Lindh.

Freedom of the press in Sweden dates back to 1766 when it was enshrined in a law enacted by the Riksdag of the Estates. It is today a part of the Constitution of Sweden.

The Swedish newspaper with the widest circulation is the evening newspaper GT) and Malmö (Kvällsposten). Bonnier AB also controls the major national morning newspaper, Dagens Nyheter. Its Stockholm competitor Svenska Dagbladet is owned by Schibsted. Göteborgs-Posten is the major regional newspaper in Gothenburg and the west of Sweden, while another Bonnier-owned newspaper, Sydsvenska Dagbladet, dominates in Malmö and the south. Bonnier AB also owns Sweden's major business newspaper, Dagens Industri. The Local is one of the few English language general news websites in the country.

Through its subsidiary Bonnier Tidskrifter AB, Bonnier AB also controls many of Sweden's most popular Amelia, Egmont and the French Hachette Filipacchi Médias. 

Sweden also has many large organizations which almost all produce membership magazines with a wide readership. The biggest ones, with readership figures above 300 000, include Vår Bostad (published by the Union of Tenants and HSB, a cooperative building society), PRO-pensionären (published by the Pensioners’ National Organization) and the magazines of the largest Municipal Workers' Union), Siftidningen (published by the Union of Clerical and Technical Employees in Industry) and Metalworkers' Union, the Industrial Union, the Graphic Workers' Union, the Paper Workers' Union and the Forest and Wood Workers' Union).

== Television ==
: ''Main article: Television in Sweden''

Television trials from the TV2, started in 1969 it was broadcast by the same company, but the two channels were supposed to compete against each other.  Since SR was split into four different companies in the late 70s, the television broadcasting has been the responsibility of Sveriges Television (SVT).

SVT and its two channels dominated television for a long time. In 1987 the first commercial channel, TV3 was started, broadcasting from TV4 became the first commercial channel to be allowed to join the national terrestrial broadcasting network, run by fee -- fixed by Parliament and collected by the Radiotjänst i Kiruna AB -- and is regulated, together with TV4, by the Swedish Broadcasting Commission.

Sweden was an early adopter of digital terrestrial television, officially launching it in April 1999.  The analogue shutdown of the SVT and TV4 signals started in September 2005 and will be completed in late 2007.

Four companies and five channels dominate the Swedish television viewing:
* SVT with SVT1 and SVT2
* TV4 (owned by Bonnier
* TV3 (owned by Modern Times Group)
* Kanal 5

The prospect of the digital shutdown has caused SVT and TV4 to start several new channels. SVT have TV6 and TV8. Other channels such as Eurosport, Discovery Channel, MTV Sweden and Disney Channel Scandinavia also have a relatively strong position in Sweden.

Two dominating networks of premium content exists: TV1000 and Viasat Sport, owned by Viasat, and C More Entertainment owned by SBS (using the Canal+ brand).

The main pay television distributors are: Boxer (terrestrial), Viasat (satellite) and Canal Digital (satellite).  There are also several smaller cable networks, most notably Tele2Vision and Canal Digital. As of 2006, it is estimated that 50 percent of the households receive their television signals from a cable network, 30 percent from a regular aerial and 20 percent using a satellite dish.<ref>[http://www.rtvv.se/_upload/infomatrial/16-51128460620567862225.pdf Medieutveckling 2006], Swedish Radio and TV Authority, ISBN 91-85229-10-5.</ref>

== Radio ==
National radio is dominated by public service company Sveriges Radio (SR), which is funded through the same fee that is collected for television sets.  The sale of commercial radio licenses began in the early 1990s, though commercial radio existed before this through local stations in the larger cities (närradio).

История '''шведской прессы''' началась в Швеции газета «», существующая до сих пор. C 1791 года издание этой газеты составляет привилегию Шведской академии.<ref name="ЭСБЕ">[http://gatchina3000.ru/brockhaus-and-efron-encyclopedic-dictionary/115/115165.htm Шведская литература и наука] // ЭСБЕ.</ref>

Раньше для издания периодического органа требовалось особое королевское разрешение, причем сам орган оставался подцензурным, как и все другие печатные издания. В 1812 году был принят закон о свободе печати, вошедший в число четырёх основных законов Швеции. Закон определил подробные правила относительно прав издательства и связанной с ними ответственности: виновные в нарушении этих правил подсудны суду присяжных. Право издавать печатный орган было предоставлено каждому, кто «не был наказан по суду за преступление или объявлен не достойным вести речь за других», под условием заявления о том министерству юстиции.<ref name="ЭСБЕ"/>

По состоянию на 1899 год в Швеции действовало 754 органа периодической печати, из них 331 газета (43 издавались в Стокгольме, из них 12 ежедневных). Провинциальная пресса, которая до 1850 года была представлена лишь одной газетой, имела их теперь 40. Некоторые газеты издавались тиражом до 100&nbsp;000 экземпляров.<ref name="ЭСБЕ"/>