Une '''Année sainte''' ou '''Jubilé''' est, dans l'basiliques majeures. Ces conditions sont généralement précisées dans la bulle d'indiction promulguée par le pape qui fixe également les dates d'ouverture et de clôture de l'Année sainte. L'Année sainte est donc un temps de conversion, de pénitence, de pardon et de rémission des peines temporelles encourues pour le péché. C'est aussi, par conséquent, une année de liesse et d'action de grâce.

Lors de l'Année sainte, la Porte Sainte de chacune des quatre basiliques majeures de Rome est solennellement ouverte. 
 
L'Année sainte puise son symbolisme dans le juif, prescrit tous les 50 ans par les commandements du Lévitique (25:8–55). Cette année-là les juifs célébraient leur libération de l'exil de Babylone par la remise des dettes et l'affranchissement des esclaves.

Au , Jésus-Christ, donc la Rédemption du genre humain. 

== Le premier jubilé catholique ==

Le premier jubilé formellement organisé par la papauté fut celui décrété en indulgence générale était accordée tous les cent ans. Le mot de « jubilé » était déjà dans l'air du temps. Le Albigeois.

Le bulle d'indiction ''Antiquorum fida relatio''. Il y institua l'année sainte et précisa les conditions de l'indulgence : être en état de grâce (renoncement au péché) (après confession et absolution), avoir visité les basiliques de Rome. Les chiffres donnés par les chroniqueurs médiévaux sont apparemment extravagants : ils s'échelonnent de 200 000 personnes à deux millions. Dante nota néanmoins que la densité de la foule obligea à aménager un sens unique sur le pont Saint-Ange, près du Vatican.

== Liste des années saintes ==
thumb|right|350px|Plaques commémorant l'ouverture et la fermeture de la Porte sainte par [[Pie XII (1950), Paul VI (1975) et Jean-Paul II (1983-1984 et 2000), basilique Saint-Jean de Latran à Rome]]

The concept of the '''Jubilee''' is a special year of remission of Jubilee year is mentioned to occur every fifty years, in which slaves and prisoners would be freed, debts would be forgiven and the mercies of God would be particularly manifest. In Catholic tradition, generally involve pilgrimage to a sacred site, normally the city of Rome. At various times in Church history, they have been celebrated every 50 or 25 years.

== "Pre-History" of the Christian Jubilee ==

The year of '''Jubilee''' in both the Jewish and Christian traditions is a time of joy, the year of remission or universal pardon. In Mosaic law, each fiftieth year was to be celebrated as a jubilee year, and that at this season every household should recover its absent members, the land return to its former owners, the Hebrew slaves be set free, and debts be remitted (see Jubilee (Biblical)).

The same conception, spiritualized, forms the fundamental idea of the Christian Jubilee, though it is difficult to judge how far any sort of continuity can have existed between the two. It is commonly stated that St. Thomas of Canterbury took place in the year 1220, fifty years after his martyrdom. The sermon on that occasion was preached by Stephen Cardinal Lantron, who told his hearers that this coincidence was meant by Providence to recall "the mystical virtue of the number fifty, which, as every reader of the sacred page is aware, is the number of remission."

We might be tempted to regard this discourse as a fabrication of later date, were it not for the fact that a Latin hymn directed against the Albigenses, and certainly belonging to the early thirteenth century, speaks in exactly similar terms. The first stanza runs thus: 

:Anni favor jubilaei 
:Poenarum laxat debitum, 
:Post peccatorum vomitum 
:Et cessandi propositum. 
:Currant passim omnes rei. 
:Pro mercede regnum Dei 
:Levi patet expositum.

::(''The blessing of the year of jubilee releases the obligation of punishments.  After sinners have been purged, the cause against them ends.  All the guilty go free by the mercy of God's kingdom, as set forth in the law of Levi.'')

In the light of this explicit mention of a jubilee with great remissions of the penalties of sin to be obtained by full confession and purpose of amendment, it seems difficult to reject the statement of Cardinal Stefaneschi, the contemporary and counsellor of Pope Boniface VIII, and author of a treatise on the first Jubilee, that the proclamation of the Jubilee owed its origin to the statements of certain aged pilgrims who persuaded Boniface that great indulgences had been granted to all pilgrims in Rome about a hundred years before. It is also noteworthy that in the Chronicle of Alberic of Three Fountains, under the year 1208 (not, be it noted 1200), we find this brief entry: "It is said that this year was celebrated as the fiftieth year, or the year of jubilee and remission, in the Roman Court."

== The first Christian jubilee ==

It is beyond all dispute that on Bull "''Antiquorum fida relatio''", in which, appealing vaguely the precedent of past ages, he declares that he grants afresh and renews certain "great remissions and St. Peter and St. Paul in Rome, at least once a day for a specified time--in the case of the inhabitants of the city for thirty days, in the case of strangers for fifteen. 

No explicit mention is made of Communion as a requirement to receive the indulgence, nor does the word ''jubilee'' occur in the Bull--indeed the pope speaks rather of a celebration which is to occur every hundred years--but writers both Roman and foreign described this year as ''annus jubileus'', and the name ''jubilee'' (though others, such as the "holy year" or "the golden year" have been used as well) has been applied to such celebrations ever since. Dante, who is himself supposed by some to have visited Rome during this year to gain the Jubilee indulgence, refers to it under the name ''Giubbileo'' in the Inferno and indirectly bears witness to the enormous concourse of pilgrims by comparing the sinners passing along one of the bridges of Malebolge in opposite directions, to the throngs crossing the bridge of the Castel Sant'Angelo on their way to and from St. Peter's. Similarly, the chronicler Giovanni Villani was so impressed on this occasion by the sight of the monuments of Rome and the people who flocked thither that he then and there formed the resolution of his great chronicle, in the course of which he gives a remarkable account of what he witnessed. 

Villani describes the indulgence connected with this jubilee as a full and entire remission of all sins ''di culpa e di pena'' (Italian: ''of guilt and of punishment''), and he dwells upon the great contentment and good order of the people, despite the fact that during the greater part of that year there were two hundred thousand pilgrims on an average present in Rome over and above the ordinary population. With regard to the phrase just noticed, ''a culpa et a poena'' (in Latin), which was often popularly used of the Jubilee and other similar indulgences, it should be observed that it means no more than what is now understood by a "plenary indulgence". It implied, however, that any approved Roman confessor had faculties to absolve from reserved cases (sins whose forgiveness can only be granted by certain priests), and that the liberty thus virtually accorded of selecting a confessor was regarded as a privilege. The phrase was an unscientific one, and was not commonly used by theologians. It certainly did not mean, as some have pretended, that the indulgence of itself released from guilt (which could be punished by Hell) as well as penalty (for sins already forgiven, usually removed in Purgatory). Guilt is actually remitted in the Catholic Church only in virtue of sacramental confession and the sorrow of the penitent. The sovereign pontiff never claimed any power of absolving in grievous matters apart from the sacrament. "All theologians", remarks Maldonatus, "unanimously without a single exception, reply that an indulgence is not a remission of guilt but of the penalty."

== The Jubilee of 1350 ==

Boniface VIII had intended that the Jubilee should be celebrated only once in a hundred years. Some time before the middle of the fourteenth century, great urgings, in which St. Birgitta of Sweden and the poet Petrarch amongst others had a share, were made to Pope Clement VI, then residing at Avignon, to anticipate this term. Clement VI assented, and in 1350 accordingly, a Jubilee was held, though the pope did not return to Rome himself. Gaetani Cardinal Ceccano was dispatched to represent him. 

On this occasion daily visits to the Basilica di San Giovanni in Laterano were enjoined, besides those to the basilicas of St. Peter and St. Paul outside the Walls, while at the next Jubilee, (in 1390) the Basilica di Santa Maria Maggiore was added to the list. The visit to these four churches has remained as one of the conditions for gaining the Roman Jubilee indulgence.

== The Jubilees of 1390 and 1423 ==

The celebration next following was held in 1390, and in virtue of an ordinance of Pope Urban VI, it was proposed to hold a Jubilee every thirty-three years as representing the period of the sojourn of Christ upon earth and also the average span of human life. In 1400, so many people came to Rome, that Pope Boniface IX granted the indulgence again, even though he had not decreed a Jubilee year previously.

Another Jubilee was proclaimed by Pope Martin V in 1423 (33 years after the last proclaimed Jubilee in 1390), but Pope Nicholas V, in 1450, reverted to the quinquagesimal period, while Pope Paul II decreed that the Jubilee should be celebrated every twenty-five years, and this has been the normal rule ever since. 

== Subsequent Jubilees ==
thumb|250px|right|[[Souvenirs, the first two dated 1950, third one 1975 and the last one 2000.]]
The Jubilees of 1450 and St. Philip Neri, was the most famous. 

Innumerable witnesses have pointed to the great moral renovation produced by these celebrations. The testimony comes in many cases from the most unexceptionable sources, and it extends from the days of Pope Boniface VIII to the striking account given by Cardinal Wiseman of the only Jubilee held in the nineteenth century, that of 1825. The omission of the Jubilees of 1800 and 1850 was due to political disturbances. Pope Pius IX announced a Jubilee for 1875, but it was celebrated without any external solemnity, with only the clergy present for the inauguration. The holy doors were not opened, and the pilgrims who came were generally in Rome to do homage to the Pope, who had not accepted the Italian annexation of Rome, rather than to obtain an indulgence. Nonetheless, with these exceptions the celebration has been uniformly maintained every twenty-five years from 1450 until the twentieth century. The Jubilee of 1900, though shorn of much of its splendour by the confinement of the Holy Father within the limits of the Vatican, was, nevertheless carried out by Pope Leo XIII with all the solemnity that was possible.