thumb|200px|Portrait of ''Yamada Nagamasa'' c.1630.
'''Yamada Nagamasa''' (Japanese: 山田長政 ''Yamada Nagamasa''; 1590&mdash;1630) was a Japanese adventurer who gained considerable influence in Thailand at the beginning of the 17th century and became the ruler of the Nakhon Si Thammarat province in southern Thailand.

Yamada Nagamasa was born in Ayutthaya (modern-day Thailand) from around 1612. 

==Japanese settlement in southeast Asia==
Yamada Nagamasa lived in the Japanese quarters of Ayutthaya, home to another 1,500 Japanese inhabitants (some estimates run as high as 7,000). The community was called "Ban Yipun" in Thai, and was headed by a Japanese chief nominated by Thai authorities. It seems to have been a combination of traders, Christian converts who had fled their home country following the persecutions of Sekigahara:

:''"From the years of Gen'na (1615–1624) through the later years of Kan'ei (1624–1644), the ''Ronin'' or warriors who lost their lords after the defeats of the battle of Osaka (1614-15) or the earlier battle of Sekigahara (1600), as well as the defeated Christians of the Shimabara uprising, went to settle in Siam in great numbers"'' (Senrakoku Fudo-gunki, 17th century, quoted by Uchida Ginzo).

The Christian community seems to have been in the hundreds, as described by Padre Antonio Francisco Cardim, who recounted having administered sacrament to around 400 Japanese Christians in 1627 in the Thai capital of Ayuthaya ("a 400 japoes christaos")(Ishii Yoneo, Multi-cultural Japan).

The colony was active in trade, particularly in the export of deer-hide to Japan in exchange for Japanese silver and Japanese handicrafts (swords, lacquered boxes, high-quality papers). They were noted by the Dutch for challenging the trade monopoly of the Dutch East India Company (VOC). The colony also had an important military role in Thailand.

==Military involvement and lordship==
thumb|left|300px|The army of Yamada Nagamasa in Thailand.
The Japanese colony was highly valued for its military expertise, and was organized under a "Department of Japanese Volunteers" (''Krom Asa Yipun'') by the Thai king. 

In the space of fifteen years, Yamada Nagamasa rose from the low Thai nobility rank of ''khun'' to the senior of ''Okya'', his title becoming ''Okya Senaphimuk (Thai : ออกญาเสนาภิมุข)''. He became the head of the Japanese colony, and in this position supported the military campaigns of the Thai king Songtham, at the head of a Japanese army flying the Japanese flag. He fought successfully, and was finally nominated Lord of Ligor (modern Nakhon Si Thammarat), in the southern peninsula in 1630, accompanied by 300 samurai.

==Travels between Siam and Japan==
thumb|300px|Yamada Nagasama's fighting ship, 17th century painting.
After more than twelve years in Siam, Yamada Nagamasa went to Japan in 1624 onboard one of his ships, where he sold a cargo of Siamese deer hide in Nagasaki. He stayed in Japan for three years, trying to obtain a Red Seal permit, but finally left in 1627, with the simple status of a foreign ship.

In 1626, Nagamasa offered a painting of one of his fighting ships to a temple of his hometown in Shizuoka. That painting was lost in a fire, but a copy of it remains to this day (shown here). It portrays a ship with Western-style rigging, 18 cannons, and sailors in samurai gear. He returned to Siam in 1627.

In 1628, one of his ships transporting rice from Ayutthaya to Batavia (Accounts of the castle of Batavia, March 1st 1628). 

thumb|180px|山田 長政 c.1630.
'''山田 長政'''（'''やまだ ながまさ'''、タイ）の日本人町を中心に東南アジアで活躍した人物。通称は'''仁左衛門'''（にざえもん）。

== 人物伝 ==
伊勢説や尾張説などもあり）。1612年に官位・欽賜名を授けられ、チャオプラヤー川に入る船から税を取る権利を得た。

thumb|left|250px|タイ王国にいる山田長政の軍

ソンタム王の死後、長政はソンタム王の遺言に従い、シーウォーラウォン（後のパタニ軍との戦闘中に脚を負傷し、傷口に毒入りの膏薬を塗られて死亡。毒を塗られたのはカラーホームの密命によるものとオランダの史料は記している。その後、ナコーンシータマラートの知事は息子のクン・セーナーピムックが引き継いだが、内部対立があり同じ日本人傭兵によって殺され、山田長政の死と同じ年に、プラーサートトーン（シーウォーラウォン）は「日本人は反乱の可能性がある」とし、シャイフ・アフマドら率いるアラビア人、タイ族、華僑の組織する兵によってアユタヤ日本人町は焼き打ちされた。

thumb|200px|山田長政の軍船

なお、日本の文学では、長政のタイ名を「オーヤー・セナピモック」、シーウォーラウォンあるいはチャオプラヤー・カラーホーム・スリヤウォンを「オーヤー・カラホム」とし、親しまれている。なお、長政が南部の王国の王となったと信ずる人もいるが、任命されたのは知事であり、正しくない。

== 関連項目 ==