'''Richard D. Ryder''' (født 1940) er en britisk dyrefrigørelsesbevægelse. Han var Mellon Professor ved Tulane University, New Orleans, og er forfatter af ''Painism: A Modern Morality'' og ''Putting Morality Back into Politics''.

Han er tidligere formand for Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, og tidligere præsident for Britain's Liberal Democrat Animal Protection Group. Siden april 2004 har han været parlamentarisk konsulent for Political Animal Lobby.

Ryder var også bidragsyder til den indflydelsesrige ''Animals, Men and Morals: An Inquiry into the Maltreatment of Non-humans'' (1972) redigeret af Roslind og Stanley Godlovitch samt John Harris. Det var i en anmeldelse af denne bog for ''New York Review of Books'' at Peter Singer, nu Ira W. DeCamp Professor i bioetik ved Princeton University, fremsagde de grundlæggende argumenter, baseret på utilitarisme, som i 1975 blev til ''Animal Liberation'', dyreretsbevægelsens "bibel".
__TOC__
==Speciesisme og painism==
Ryder opfandt begrebet ''speciesisme'' i 1970 mens han lå i badet, [http://www.guardian.co.uk/animalrights/story/0,11917,1543799,00.html] og brugte det for første gang i en privat printet pamflet udgivet i Oxford samme år.

Han kalder sin nuværende synsvinkel på ikkemenneskers moralske status for deontologiske syn på rettigheder. Det kombinerer det utilitaristiske syn om at moralsk status kommer fra evnen til at føle smerte med rettighedssynet som forbyder os at bruge andre til at nå vores egne mål. 

Han har kritiseret Regans kriterie om naturlig værdi, og siger at alle væsner som føler smerte har naturlig værdi. Han har også kritiseret den utilitaristiske ide om at udnyttelsen af andre kan retfærdiggøres hvis der er en samlet fremgang i glæde, og siger at: ''"Et af problemerne med det utilitaristiske syn er at for eksempel et offer for gruppevoldtægts lidelse kan retfærdiggøres hvis voldtægten giver voldtægtsmændene en større sum nydelse."  Dette er dog senere blevet "rettet" i Singers præferenceutilitarisme.

'''Richard D. Ryder''' (born 1940) is a British psychologist who, after performing psychology experiments on animals, began to speak out against the practice, and became one of the pioneers of the modern animal liberation movement. He was Mellon Professor at Tulane University, New Orleans, and is the author of ''Painism: A Modern Morality'' and ''Putting Morality Back into Politics'', due to be published in 2006.

A former chairman of the Liberal Democrat Animal Protection Group, he is parliamentary consultant to the Political Animal Lobby as of April 2004.

Arguably Ryder's most famous work is ''Victims of Science'' (1975) detailing the long history of the use of animals in medical and other research. Ryder was a contributor to the influential ''Animals, Men and Morals: An Inquiry into the Maltreatment of Non-humans'' (1972) edited by Roslind and Stanley Godlovitch and John Harris. It was in a review of this book for the ''New York Review of Books'' that Animal Liberation'', the book often referred to as the "bible" of the animal rights movement.
__TOC__
==Speciesism and painism==
Ryder coined the term ''speciesism'' in 1970 while lying in the bath,<ref name="Guardian"></ref> and first used it in a privately-printed leaflet published in Oxford that same year.

He calls his current position on the moral status of non-human animals deontological rights view. It combines the utilitarian view that moral status comes from the ability to feel pain with the rights view prohibition on using others as a means to our ends. 

He has criticized Regan’s criterion for inherent worth, arguing that all beings who feel pain have inherent value. He has also criticized the utilitarian idea that exploitation of others can be justified if there is an overall gain in pleasure, arguing that: "One of the problems with the utilitarian view is that, for example, the sufferings of a gang-rape victim can be justified if the rape gives a greater sum total of pleasure to the rapists."<ref name="Guardian">b</ref>