'''Vinyl roof''' refers to a Detroit cars. Vinyl roofs were also very popular on European- (especially UK-) and Japanese-built cars during the 1970s, and tended to be applied to sporting or luxury trim versions of standard saloon (sedan) models

Vinyl roof could also refer to a polyvinyl chloride (PVC) roofing membrane used in commercial construction. Vinyl roofing membranes have been around for over 40 years in the U.S. and longer in Europe. The British Board of Agreement states that certain vinyl roof membranes "should have a life in excess of 30 years." Vinyl roofs are also the only type of commercial roofing product that has an active recycling program in place.

{| align="right"
| thumb|right|180px|1974 Ford Consul GT 2.3 V6 with factory fitted vinyl roof
| thumb|right|200px|Lincoln Town-Car with Vinyl roof
| thumb|right|150px|1977 Opel Commodore B with factory fitted vinyl roof
|}

==History==

The first use of this technique goes back to the 1920s, when leather, canvas and vinyl were sometimes used along with landau bars, to give a fairly accurate reproduction of a horse-drawn carriage's movable top. An early example of this was the 1928 - 1929 Ford Model "A" Special Coupe, that featured a roof completely covered with a vinyl-like material.  This Model "A" Special Coupe's vinyl roof had two exposed seams on the back corners, with a lateral seam on the top covered with a narrow trim strip; landau bars were not provided on this model.  The technique fell out of favor in the 1930s and 1940s, when smoother, "envelope" bodies began to be fashionable; for these designs, the look of the modern, integrated metal roof was important.

Lincoln used the convertible look on some of its Cosmopolitan coupes in the 1950s, as did the Kaiser firm on its Manhattan sedans, although the material was still canvas.  In the very late-1950s, Imperial made a limited use of true vinyl on some models. Probably the first modern vinyl roof as it would later be accepted, though, was the 1956 Cadillac Eldorado Seville that came standard with a roof covered in an early vinyl material called "Vicodec" with two parallel seams running the length of the roof.  Ford followed a few years later with a vinyl roof option on the 1962 Ford Thunderbird, a car which also re-introduced landau bars as a styling touch.  The vinyl covering proved popular, and some form of vinyl trim would be seen on Thunderbird roofs for the next two decades.

Other manufacturers noticed immediately that the new look could be profitable &ndash; it did not cost very much to add, but many buyers willingly paid a premium for it. Vinyl appeared on some coupe models in GM's 1962 full-size line. Chrysler took the first step toward moving the look out of the higher-price class, however, when they made a partial vinyl roof available on the compact 1963 Mustang as well. By mid-decade, four-doors as well as coupes could be topped with a number of colorful vinyls.

From that point on, vinyl proliferated rapidly and became very common in most car classes by the late-1960s, even appearing on some station wagons. Vinyls were produced that mimicked other materials such as (ironically) canvas, and even alligator hide. Chrysler briefly produced some patterns, with paisley or floral designs &ndash; this was called the "Mod Top" option. The Mercury Cougar briefly offered a houndstooth pattern. There was even an aftermarket spray-on product that claimed to add that factory vinyl look, but mostly it just added the spray-on look. By 1972, even the humble Ford Pinto sported a vinyl roof option, and a Ford sales brochure of the time conceded that vinyl was mostly for looks.
thumb|1973 Lincoln Mark IV
At about that same time, the modern opera window first appeared, and it went so well with a vinyl surround that the two together became emblematic of American body design in the 1970s. During this period, vinyl with padding under it was sometimes used, allowing the top to somewhat mimic the feel as well as the look of a genuine convertible.  

European and Japanese manufacturers were not immune to this trend. Chrysler used it on upmarket models of its Hunter and Avenger saloons; Ford had vinyl roofs on Escorts, Cortinas, Taunuses, and Granadas into the early 1980s. British Leyland had vinyl roofs on the last Wolseley and top-end Leyland Princess models, and optional for all other models. Toyota adopted vinyl roofs for its Corona sedans in the mid-1970s, and they could be found on Nissan Laurels and Cedrics.

thumb|right|"Grand Floridian" aftermarket top
Vinyl continued to appear in many car lines through the 1980s, but the coming of the "aero look," first introduced to the U.S. market by the 1983 Thunderbird, tended to militate against both opera windows and vinyl roofs, as their more formal style did not go well with the sleek profile designers were beginning to emphasize.  During this final phase, canvas-look tops, often called cabriolet roofs, with simulated convertible top bows under the fabric, gained some popularity. The availability of all vinyl styles dwindled in the 1990s, until the 1996 Cadillac Fleetwood Limited offered one of the very last ones.  

Hearse and limousine bodies almost universally still have vinyl tops.  Not only are they part of the expected style of those vehicles, but they have a practical advantage in covering up the welded body seams that result when standard sedans are stretched to greater length. Aftermarket customizers also continue to install vinyl roofs of various types. These are usually seen on Cadillacs and Lincolns, but can be fitted to virtually any kind of car.

thumb|[[Ford Granada mit Vinyldach]]
thumb|[[Ford Taunus 17m mit Vinyldach]]
thumb|left|Lincoln Town-Car
thumb|Ein 91er [[Cadillac DeVille]]

Ein '''Vinyldach''' war in den 1960er-Jahren eine Zeit lang ein Unterscheidungsmerkmal von als höherwertig propagierten Automobilen. Es wurde am deutschen Markt als Option von Ford und Opel angeboten; einzelne Modelle (wie der Opel Diplomat) hatten in bestimmten Baujahren ein Vinyldach serienmäßig.

Das Vinyldach besteht aus einem normal lackierten Blechdach, das mit einer strukturierten Kunststofffolie (Vinyl) beklebt ist. Die gängigste Farbe ist schwarz. Jedoch wurden oft auch Dächer in weiß, rot und grün produziert. Denkbar sind auch alle anderen Farben, da Polyvinylchlorid sich mit entsprechenden industriellen Farbstoffen beliebig einfärben lässt.

Es folgte den früher käuflichen Zweifarben-Lackierungen nach, die aufgrund ihres produktionstechnischen Aufwandes in der Mitte der 1960er-Jahre vom Markt verschwanden.

Das Vinyldach sorgte allerdings in späteren Jahren infolge Ablösens an den Rändern sehr oft für Verdruss bei den Eignern. Diese Fahrzeuge konnten dann sehr unansehnlich erscheinen. Ein Ärgernis war auch das starke Aufheizen des Vinyldaches bei sommerlichem Wetter. Die Einwirkungen von Temperaturänderungen machten insbesondere bei Dächern, die mit Schiebedach-Ausschnitten zusätzliche Kanten hatten, vermehrt Probleme.