'''Ziri ibn 'Atiyya ibn Abd Allah ibn Tabādalt ibn Muhammad ibn Khazar az-Zanātī al-Maghrāwī al-Khazarī''' (d. 1001), first Maghrawa ruler of the Kingdom of Fes and other parts of Morocco, Algeria and Tunisia.

Under the protection of the Al-Mansur, Ziri became king of the Zenata tribes in 978-979 and immediately set about conquering as much of Morocco as he could. In 987-988 he was secure enough to be able to establish his court at Fes.

In 989, he was asked by Al-Mansur to attack Abu al-Bahār, who controlled most of what is now Algeria and Tunisia. Abu al-Bahār had deserted the Fatimid cause to align himself with the Umayyads, but then changed sides again once he had gained control of most of the Maghreb. Ziri attacked with such vigour that Abu al-Bahār fled without much of a fight, and Ziri became master of the Maghreb in the year 991.

After this victory, Ziri is said to have sent Al-Mansur a present consisting of 200 racehorses, 50 racing camels, 1000 shields, musk civets, giraffes, gazelles and other animals of the Sahara, and 1000 loads of dates. Al-Mansur invited Ziri to Cordoba. He went accompanied by 300 slaves on horseback and 300 more on foot, as well as taking more presents including lions in cages, cattle that resembled horses, a bird that spoke both Arabic and Berber, dates the size of melons, and other prodigies. Al-Mansur gave him the title of vizir. However, on his return to Morocco, Ziri is said to have exclaimed "Now my head is my own!" and forbade anyone to call him by any title other than amir.

In his absence, the Banu Ifran had managed to capture Fes. They were led by Yaddū, a long-standing adversary of Ziri. After a bloody struggle, Ziri recaptured Fes in 993 and displayed Yaddū's severed head on its walls. There followed a period of peace during which time Ziri built (or rebuilt) the city of Oujda beginning in August or September of 994.

'''Ziri Ibn Attia '''  fut un chef de la tribu de Maghraoua, du groupe berbère des Zénètes. Il sera nommé Vizir par les Ommeyades, mais par la suite prendra partie pour les Fatimides.
Ziri Ibn Attia occupera une grande partie du Maghreb. il s'auto-proclamera Émir de tous les Zénètes. 

== Histoire ==

Au début, Zir Ibn Attia rassemble tous les Zénètes pour envahir le Maroc actuel. Mais une compétition acharnée entre lui et Yeddou des Banou Ifren se déclenche pour la prise du pouvoir de Fès.

Ziri Ibn Attia profite de la décadence des Idrissides pour se dérober à la souveraineté des  Omeyyades de Cordoue et s'empare de Fès en 988. La ville de Fès sera la capitale du royaume Zénète.

Ensuite, Ziri Ibn Attia sera invité par Almanzor en Espagne pour recevoir son titre de Vizir.
À ce moment, Yeddou prend Fès des Maghraoua. 
À son retour, Ziri Ibn Attia chasse Yeddou de Fès et reprend la ville. 

Par la suite ,Ziri Ibn Attia se rebelle contre le régime d'Almanzor et des Omeyyades.