'''''Mission: Impossible''''' adalah ABC dari 1988 sampai 1990. Lagu temanya yang digubah Lalo Schifrin sangat terkenal bukan saja bagi penggemar film dan televisi tapi dalam budaya pop.

Seri ini diciptakan, ditulis, dan diproduksi oleh Bruce Geller. Ceritanya adalah mengenai kelompok Impossible Mission Force (IMF) yang terdiri dari sejumlah agen rahasia. Mereka dikirim ke berbagai misi untuk menumbangkan diktator dan organisasi kejahatan. Dalam misi ini mereka menggunakan berbagai teknologi canggih dan bergerak secara rahasia tanpa melibatkan banyak orang.

Pada tahun 1996, 2000, dan 2006, Tom Cruise membintangi dan memproduksi 3 film layar lebar yang berjudul sama dan mengambil banyak unsur cerita film seri ini.

== Pemain ==
Urutan alfabetis:
*Barbara Anderson as Mimi Davis (Season 7)
*Barbara Bain as Cinnamon Carter (Seasons 1–3)
*Sam Elliott as Dr. Doug Robert a.k.a. Lang (Season 5 and one Season 6 episode)
*Lynda Day George as Lisa Casey (Seasons 6–7)
*Peter Graves as Team Leader Jim Phelps (Seasons 2–7)
*Steven Hill as Team Leader Dan Briggs (Season 1)
*Bob Johnson as the Voice on Tape (uncredited, voice only)
*Martin Landau as Rollin Hand (Seasons 1–3; Landau was considered a guest star during the first season, even though he appeared in nearly every episode)
*Peter Lupus as Willy Armitage (all seasons)
*Greg Morris as Barney Collier (all seasons)
*Leonard Nimoy as The Great Paris (Seasons 4–5)
*Lesley Ann Warren as Dana Lambert (Season 5)

{{infobox Television | 
  | show_name = Mission: Impossible
  | image = Image:CBS-Milogo.jpg
  | caption = Original series logo
  | format = Espionage
  | runtime = 1 hour
  | creator = Bruce Geller
  | starring = Peter Graves (with various other cast members, see below)
  | theme_music_composer = Lalo Schifrin
  | country = 
  | network = CBS
  | first_aired = 1966
  | last_aired = 1973
  | num_seasons = 7 
  | num_episodes = 171 
  | list_episodes = List of Mission: Impossible episodes
  | followed_by = ''Mission: Impossible (1988 TV series)''
  | imdb_id = 0060009
  | tv_com_id = 577
|}}

'''''Mission: Impossible''''' (often referred to as '''''Mission: Impossible: The Original Series''''') is an American Peter Graves played Jim Phelps, the IMF leader.

The series aired on the 1966 to March 1973.  It returned to television, as a revival,  for two seasons on ABC, from 1988 to 1990 and later inspired a popular trio of theatrical motion pictures starring Tom Cruise in the 1990s and 2000s.

The theme music, composed by Lalo Schifrin, is widely considered to be one of the most iconic television themes.

==Series overview==
The series, which was created and initially produced by Bruce Geller, follows the missions of the Impossible Missions Force (IMF), a team of secret agents employed by the United States government. The team is sent on covert missions to combat dictators, evil organizations, and (primarily in later episodes) crime lords. On occasion, the IMF is also shown conducting unsanctioned, private missions on behalf of its members. The exact branch of the government overseeing the IMF is never identified, and in the 1980s revival it was suggested the IMF is an independent agency (as the FBI is legally bound to operate only within the U.S.A. and the CIA is likewise bound to only conduct its business ''outside'' the U.S.A.) until the first film which was made at the Langley, VA headquarters of the CIA. The IMF Director answered to "the Secretary," who the mission voice said "would disavow any knowledge of your actions" in the event "you or any of your IM Force" were to get "caught or killed," but exactly which secretary was never indicated.

===IMF leaders===
The leader of the IMF, presumably with the official title of Director, was initially Dan Briggs (played by Peter Graves), who remained as the leader for the remainder of the original series and again in the 1988-90 revival.   

Hill, an Orthodox Jew, had to leave on Fridays at 4:00 to be home before sundown.  He was not available until sundown the next day.  Although his contract allowed for taping interruption due to religious observances, the clause proved difficult to work around due to the taping schedule.  By the end of the first year, both parties agreed to release him from his contract. He was replaced by Peter Graves at the beginning of the second season.

Briggs and Phelps were the only "full-time" members of the IMF, and they were charged with forming mission teams made up of "part-time" agents who came from a variety of professions and walks of life. Briggs/Phelps chose his operatives based upon whether they had a particular skill to contribute to the mission. There was a core group of three or four agents who were regularly chosen, but the episodes do not always feature the same regulars, and many episodes feature one-time "guest star" agents who are assigned based upon a unique skill.

For an example, the regular agent line-up during the first season consists of: Cinnamon Carter (Barbara Bain), a fashion model and actress; Barney Collier, (Greg Morris) a mechanical and electronics genius and owner of Collier Electronics; Willy Armitage, (Peter Lupus) a world record-holding weight lifter; and Rollin Hand, (Martin Landau) a noted actor, make-up artist, escape artist, and magician. As actors left the series over time, other agents became regulars; Barney and Willy were the only agents to remain throughout the full run of the original series. Collier also appeared in two episodes of the revival series, in which the character's son, Grant Collier (Greg Morris's real-life son Phil Morris), is an IMF agent. Replacements often incorporated the skills of their predecessors. For example, "The Great Paris", (Leonard Nimoy) Hand's replacement in the fourth and fifth seasons, was also an actor, make-up artist and magician. In seasons six and seven, Paris was replaced by a female master of disguise, Lisa Casey (Lynda Day George), who also incorporated elements of Cinnamon Carter.

===Cold War subtext===
Although a Slavic or anonymous Gellerese," was invented specifically to be readable by non-speakers of Slavic languages; their generous use of it was actually intended as a source of comic relief.) Uniforms of the target regime frequently include peaked caps, jackboots, and Sam Browne belts, hinting at connections with Nazi Germany or the Warsaw Pact.

===Adversaries unrelated to the Cold War===
The IMF is also assigned to bring down corrupt politicians and dictators of Central or South American nations, as well as organized crime figures, corrupt businessmen and politicians in the U.S. As noted in the reference work ''The Complete "Mission: Impossible" Dossier'' by Patrick White, many IMF missions were essentially assassinations in disguise; in the first-season episode "Memory" it is established that the unspecified government agency behind the IMF has forbidden it to commit outright assassinations "as a matter of policy," and many missions therefore involve the IMF creating circumstances such as distrust and discreditation that often resulted (a la COINTELPRO) in villains being killed by their own people or other enemies. A notable example is the second season two-part story "The Council," later released to European movie houses under the title ''Mission Impossible vs. the Mob,'' in which the IMF, with premeditation, creates a circumstance in which the villain will inevitably be killed by his own men. There is some inconsistency in this policy and, as an example, the sadistic camp commander in "Snowball in Hell" is killed directly by the team. Gunplay is relatively rare on the part of the IMF since its methods for accomplishing its various missions tend to be those used by con men to fleece the gullible, although several episodes in the early seasons (for example, the second season episode, "The Spy", as well as in the pilot episode) do show the agents shooting people in the course of their missions, when necessary (usually underlings or enemy soldiers).

===Fifth season===
During the fifth season, White notes, the producers began to phase out the international missions, deciding instead to task the IMF with battling organized crime figures (though there was still the occasional international mission). These gangland bosses are usually associated with the "Syndicate," a generic organization, or its franchises. Generally when describing such assignments the tape message noted that the target was outside the reach of "conventional law enforcement." The objective of such missions was usually simply to obtain evidence admissible in court or to trick the mobsters into making a confession while being recorded.

==Format==
''Mission: Impossible'' is noted for its format which rarely changes throughout the series. Indeed the opening scenes acquired a ritualistic feel, befitting the "quasi-official" aura the program sought for the clandestine operations it showcases.
 
=== Tape scene ===
 
Most episodes of the series begin with the team leader arriving at some public place -- a park, a penny arcade, a store, ''etc''. where, invariably after sharing a few words with a clerk or attendant (using a code sentence to signal to them that he is after the recording), he will find a hidden recording.  The most familiar format of this recording was reel to reel tape played on a small recorder, but in the first few seasons of the series, Briggs/Phelps would receive the briefing using any manner of playback device such as phonograph records and slide-tape projection machines, and in one early episode ("Memory"), Briggs receives his instructions on a business card.  An envelope of photographs of the primary "targets" of the assignment usually accompanied the recording, and the team leader would be shown flipping through these while listening to the recorded message.  These recordings were always placed in an inconspicuous place.  
 
Aside from giving Briggs/Phelps the basics of the mission, the recording always indicated that the IMF leader had the option of refusing the mission ("Your mission, should you decide to accept it..."), and that should any team member be "caught or killed, the Secretary will disavow any knowledge of your actions" (in the history of the series, this happened only once when an IMF agent died during the 1988 revival season).  At this point the message needed to be destroyed in order to maintain secrecy; the most famous rendition of this is the recorded voice's advisory, "This tape will self-destruct in five seconds," at which time the tape would disintegrate in a cloud of smoke.  Until this became standard, Briggs/Phelps would also often be requested to destroy the tape manually ("Please dispose of this...in the usual manner,") by tossing it into a nearby furnace, nearby vat of acid; or even disposing of it in a large container of water, which because it was coated with special chemicals, would cause the tape to instantly decompose. 
 
In the first season episode "Action!," due to the absence of actor Steven Hill, the taped message was received by agent Cinnamon Carter. This was the only time someone other than Briggs/Phelps received the briefing.
 
In the 1980s revival, the message arrived on miniature DVD-like discs, played on a disposable miniature video player with a built-in screen, which as usual would self-destruct after being played. 
 
These briefings were read by voice actor Bob Johnson in the original series and the 1988 revival (the aforementioned episode "Memory" is the only regular-format episode in which Johnson was not heard), but the identity of the character was never revealed, nor was his face ever shown.  (It is presumed that this is not the Secretary himself; whoever it is they evidence a familiarity with Briggs/Phelps, enough so to be on a first name basis with them, as the recordings usually end with "Good luck, Dan" or "Good luck, Jim").  The film ''Mission: Impossible'' revealed the name of the person behind the messages in the film as Eugene Kittridge, played by Henry Czerny.  In the second film, the voice behind the messages was given the name Swanbeck and was played by Anthony Hopkins.  The voice in the third film is that of IMF agent Ethan Hunt's superior, played by Billy Crudup.  It is not known if any of the film characters correspond to the TV version.
 
There were a handful of exceptions to the "message from the Secretary".  In the fifth season the producers experimented with the format by eliminating the taped briefing, starting the episode with the mission already underway.  In a few other cases, a personal matter involving Briggs, Phelps or an IMF operative would result in an "off-book" mission being undertaken.  Peter Graves, who played the role of Jim Phelps, once said the entire season's worth of "tape scenes" were usually filmed all at once prior to production of the rest of the episodes, and that he never knew which tape scene would appear with which episode until broadcast.
 
During the original run of the series, the "tape scene" was twice parodied on ''The Tonight Show'' by Johnny Carson, showing him as the "Improbable Missions Force" leader trapped with the self-exploding tape in a telephone booth and a men's room, both times staggering out afterward dazed and with his clothing scorched and tattered, and in the latter with the toilet seat hanging on his shoulder.

=== Dossier scene ===
 
Next would follow what White refers to as the "Dossier Scene".  Briggs or Phelps would be shown in a high-class apartment (presumably his own or an IMF-sponsored safe house), retrieving an oversized, leather-bound dossier folder from a locked drawer.  Inside this folder were plastic-wrapped dossiers (usually featuring standard 8x10 "glossies" of the respective actors) of the available IMF agents.  Briggs/Phelps would be shown contemplating the various agents, putting some aside, and tossing the selected agents' dossiers onto a table (according to White, one of the never-chosen dossiers was a photograph of Bruce Geller himself).  (A contemporary article in ''TV Guide'' claimed that many of the photos put aside in the "Dossier scene" were of studio and network executives, and that it was considered a measure of one's status in the studio and network hierarchies to appear there.)
 
In early seasons the agents selected often included guest stars playing agents with skills not present among the usual team.  A doctor, particularly a specialist in a condition known to afflict the target, was a common sort of "guest agent".  In numerous early episodes the IMF leader would choose only one or two team members, though at least one of the main credited cast members was always involved.  In later seasons the team was much more stable, consisting of the leader and the regular cast of the season, and the use of guest agents became markedly less frequent.
 
In the pilot episode, it is stated the team leaders have unlimited resources and wide discretion in choosing their team.  Presumably the actual plan is settled on based in part on the agents available, an evaluation of the goal, ''etc''.  Whether the leader arrives at the plan independently or has assistance in developing it is never made clear.  These preparations and the logistics are never shown though are generally implied by the scenes that depict various steps of the process by which the team undertakes its mission.  IMF protocol seems to be rapid deployment as it is implied only a short period of time lapses from the initial assignment until the team is in the field.

===Apartment scene===
In the third segment of the opening act, called the "Apartment Scene" by White, the team would next be shown convening for their final briefing in the leader's apartment. Although the series was in color, the set and the costumes in this scene—everything in frame—was always black, white, or shades of gray. It was sometimes referred to off-camera as the black and white room. An exception was the briefing in the aforementioned first-season episode "Action!", which took place in a beauty salon and the briefings were picked up by Cinnamon Carter. 

The "Apartment Scene" acted as a teaser; in discussing the plan to achieve the objective of the mission and their role in executing it the team members would make vague references to preparations necessary for its successful execution while leaving most details undisclosed. This scene also demonstrated—and thereby established credibility for—various gadgets or ploys that were key to the plan, such as a TV camera hidden in a brooch, a miniature radio-controlled hovercraft, a chess-playing computer, a "mentalist" or sleight-of-hand act, or even a trained animal. This scene in addition would establish, or at least hint at, the specialties and role in the plan of any "guest star" agents. Team members posing questions about aspects of the plan or why an alternative wasn't considered provided the writers an opportunity to offer explanations for what otherwise might have seemed plot holes. And often Phelps in summing up would stress the difficulties in the action they were about to undertake or some key element of the plan vital to its success, such as a deadline by which the mission was to be completed.

During the fifth season the producers decided to phase out the tape scene, dossier scene and the apartment scenes. By the end of the season, however, it had been decided to keep the tape and apartment scenes, but the dossier-choosing scene was eliminated for the rest of the series run. The 1980s revival reinstated the "dossier scene" in the first episode when Phelps selected his new team, but since he kept the same team in subsequent episodes no subsequent dossier scenes were made.

===Plan===
The episode then depicted the plan being put into action. This almost always involved very elaborate deceptions, usually several at one time. Facilitating this, certain team members had among their skills being masters of disguise able to enact a role to insert themselves onto the target's staff, impersonate/replace a member of the staff or sometimes even taking the place of the target themselves. This was accomplished by the donning of elaborate latex masks and makeup. Some impersonations were done with the explicit cooperation of the one being impersonated. Also bona fides would be arranged ("the letter from Chicago was sent Monday") to aid infiltrating the target organization. In some cases, the impersonation was facilitated for filming purposes by having the actor playing the IMF agent also cast as the person to be impersonated (this most frequently occurred during Martin Landau's tenure on the series); in other cases, a guest-starring actor would provide either the physical performance or overdubbed vocal performance to make Hand's, Paris' or Casey's impersonations perfect.

A few early episodes of the first season included a scene depicting the painstaking creation and application of these masks, usually by disguise and makeup expert Rollin Hand.  This was later omitted as the series progressed and the audience presumably became familiar with the mechanics of the team's methods. In the 1980s revival, the mask-making process involved a digital camera and computer and was mostly automatic. Most episodes included a dramatic "reveal" (also referred to as the "peel-off") near the end of the episode in which the team member would remove the mask. 

Various technological methods were commonly used as well. The team would often re-route telephone or radio calls so these could be answered by their own members. Faked radio or television broadcasts were common, as were elevators placed under the team's control. In some missions a very extensive simulated setting was created, such as a faked train journey, submarine voyage, aftermath of a major disaster, or even the taking over of the United States by a foreign government. A particularly elaborate ploy, used on more than one occasion, saw the IMF work to convince their target that several years had passed while the target was in a coma or similar condition. In one episode the IMF even convinced their target (an aging mobster played by William Shatner) that he had somehow traveled ''back'' in time. 

The team would usually arrange for some situation to arise with which the target would have to deal in a predictable way, and the team would then arrange the circumstances to guide the outcome to the desired end. Often the plans turned on elaborate psychology, such as exploiting rivalries or an interest in the supernatural. Many plans simply caused the target to become confused or erratic or irrational, lose self-assurance, lose trust in subordinates or partners, etc., so that either the target would do what the team wanted (by falling back on predictable acts of desperation), or else the target's subordinates would replace the target and then act according to the team's predictions. 

These various ploys would usually result in either information being revealed to the team, or the target's disgrace and discreditation, or both. 

In many early episodes the mission was to "neutralize" the target and it was made clear that the target was ultimately shot by his superiors, staff, or rivals, though this was usually not shown on screen. In later seasons where the targets were usually organized crime figures or similar, the goal of the mission was often simply to collect incriminating evidence not obtainable by "conventional law-enforcement agencies." The team wasn't above falsifying evidence if authentic evidence couldn't be obtained. 

Dramatic tension was provided by situations in which team members appeared in danger of being discovered (especially before commercial breaks). Sometimes unexpected events occurred that forced the team to improvise. On occasion an outside party or one of the targets realized what was happening and put the success of the plan at risk.

According to White, William Read Woodfield and Allan Balter, who served as story consultants for the first two seasons and became producers of the third season, relied heavily on ''The Big Con,'' written by David W. Maurer, for their inspiration. Hence Briggs/Phelps became the "grifter-in-charge;" Rollin Hand and Cinnamon Carter were highly effective "ropers," and Barney Collier and Willy Armitage were experts at building and/or equipping "big stores."

===Episode Locations===
The original series was filmed almost excusively around Hollywood and around the Los Angeles Basin as were many other series during that period.  Pasadena and the Caltech campus were common locations.  Another noted location was the Bradbury Building used in other films and series. Two pilot made-for-TV films both titled "Call to Danger" noted in the Dossier were also produced with Graves in the LA area.

The later revival was shot primarily in Australia.

===Variations===
Several times the series deviated from the standard format. In one episode of the original series, a gangster kidnapped the daughter of a friend of Dan Briggs and forced him to kidnap a witness against him. In another, one mistake caused Cinnamon Carter to be exposed and captured by the villains, and Jim Phelps prepared a plan to rescue her. Another episode had Willy caught by the bad guys at the beginning and the episode revolved around his rescue. Other episodes featured Phelps on personal missions when he returned to his home for a visit; on one occasion he was captured and the team had to rescue him, on another he involved the team in an attempt to solve a series of murders among his childhood acquaintances. In the 1980s series, former IMF agent Barney Collier was framed for a crime he didn't commit and the IMF team had to rescue him, leading to a reuniting of Barney with his son and IMF agent Grant Collier (in real life played by father-and-son Greg and Phil Morris).

===Conclusion===
The last element of the ''M:I'' format was the conclusion of each episode. Very rarely did any sort of epilogue occur; in most cases, the action lasted right up to the final seconds, with the episode often ending in a freeze frame as the IMF team made their escape, another successful mission concluded. Most often they left in a nondescript panel truck, although at least once they left in a station wagon, once in a Mercedes Benz sedan and another time in a red Aston Martin. In the 1980s revival, this format was altered with the addition of a tag scene showing the IMF team regrouping (often still in disguise) and walking away from the site of their concluded mission, often accompanied by a quip uttered by Jim Phelps.

==Music==

Aside from the now iconic main theme, the background music would incorporate minimalist innovations of percussion such as simply a snare drum and cymbals to build tension during the more "sneaky" moments of the episodes. Sometimes accompanied by a low level flute. These quieter passages would greatly contrast the more bombastic fanfares when a mission member is at risk of getting caught just prior to a commercial break.   

==Awards==
*Mission: Impossible, Golden Globe award, best show, 1968
*Barbara Bain, Emmy Award, best actress, 1967
*Barbara Bain, Emmy Award, best actress, 1968
*Barbara Bain, Emmy Award, best actress, 1969
*Bruce Geller, Emmy Award, best writer, best producer, 1967
*Peter Graves, Golden Globe award, best actor, 1971
*Martin Landau, Golden Globe award, best actor, 1968
*Jerome Ross (writer), Edgar Award, best episode in a TV series ("Operation Rogosh"), 1967

==Inspirations and innovations==
A key inspiration for Geller in creating the series was the 1964 Topkapi'', innovative for its coolly existential depiction of an elaborate heist. Geller switched the story away from the criminals of Topkapi to the good guys of the IMF, but kept Dassin's style of minimal dialogue, prominent music scoring and clockwork-precision plots executed by a team of diverse specialists. Several episodes in fact show close-up shots of an agent's wristwatch to convey the suspense of working on a deadline.

One of the more controversial points of Geller's was his insistence on minimizing character development. This was done intentionally both because he felt that seeing the characters as ''tabula rasas'' would make them more convincing in undercover work, and because he wanted to keep the focus on the caper and off the characters themselves. Geller would even veto the writers' attempts to develop the characters in the episodes. This is why, at least until Geller's departure from the show (and actually afterwards as well), the IMF agents would only have one scene at Jim's apartment where they interacted, and they were rarely if ever seen in their "real" lives.

As a side effect of this, cast turnover was never once explained on the show. None of the main characters ever died or were disavowed in the original series, but a character could disappear in an interval of one episode without mention or acknowledgment. The 1980s revival, however, did kill off a main character on screen; Bruce Geller died on 27 May, 1978 in a plane crash in Santa Barbara, CA, so was unable to potentially veto the decision.<ref>''The Mission: Impossible Dossier''</ref> The Mimi Davis character is the only one shown on screen being recruited as an IMF agent.

The producers of ''Mission: Impossible'' were sued for plagiarism by the creators of a show called ''21 Beacon Street''. The suit was settled out of court. Geller claimed never to have seen the earlier show. (''Beacon Street'''s story editor, Laurence Heath, would later write several episodes of ''M:I''.)

Writer William Read Woodfield was a fan of David Maurer's nonfiction book about con artists, ''The Big Con'' (also an unofficial inspiration for ''The Sting''), and many episodes are strikingly similar to cons described in the book.

Part of each episode's Battlestar Galactica'' TV series also uses this device.) This created some production difficulties as the title sequence for an episode could not be completed until after most of the principal photography and editing was done. Most series' title sequences are composed once per season at most.  

''Mission: Impossible'' is still recognized for its innovative use of music. Composer theme tune—written in (unusual) 5/4 time—while an animated burning fuse moved across the screen. Most episodes included fairly long dialogue-free sequences showing the team members—particularly electronics expert Barney Collier—making technical preparations for the mission, usually to the accompaniment of another easily–recognizable tune called "The Plot." Lalo Schifrin also wrote a theme piece for each main character and the sound track for each episode incorporated variations of these throughout. The series had great impact on film and TV music. Before ''Mission: Impossible,'' a common compliment for film and TV music was along the lines of "it worked very well but never got in the way or called attention to itself." By contrast, ''Mission: Impossible'' was praised for the prominence of its music. 