thumb|Ismail Yasin

'''Ismail Yasin''' (also credited as ''Ismail Yasseen''; Egyptian actor specializing in comedy. He is famous for a series of films with his name in the title.

Ismail Yassin had a difficult childhood in Suez where he was born. His mother died at an early age and his father was jailed thus forcing him to leave school before completing his primary education. He worked as a parking valet to support himself.

He started his career as a monologue singer and headed for Cairo to join Badi'a Masabny's troupe. His break into the movie industry came when Fouad El-Gazaery gave him his first role in the movie "Khalf El-Habayeb" in 1939. He later joined Ali El-Kassar's troupe and started to gain widespread recognition eventually becoming one of most popular stars in the Arab world. A record 15 movies used his name in their titles to capitalize on his fame.

He was not particularly attractive but he had great control of his facial expressions and often made fun of his 'large mouth' in his films. His trademark gimmick was to act terrified bringing his wobbling knees together, stretching his shaking arms in front of him, stammering silently, and suddenly snapping out of his panic with a loud inhalation of air.

In the 1960s his health began to deteriorate and he moved to Lebanon where he participated in a number of films. He later returned to Egypt where he became heavily in debt. He died of a heart attack in 1972. He has a son, Yasin Isamil Yasin, who is a famous Egyptian film director.

{{معلومات شخصية
   | اسم          = إسماعيل يس
   | صورة         = Ismail Yassin.jpg
   | عنوان الصورة = إسماعيل يس
   | مذكر         = مذكر
   | تاريخ الولادة = 15 سبتمبر 1915
   | مكان الولادة  = السويس
   | تاريخ الوفاة = 24 مايو 1972
   | مكان الوفاة  = القاهرة
}}

'''إسماعيل ياسين''' (مصرى ولد بمدينة السويس واشتهر بأعماله الكوميدية.

بدأ إسماعيل ياسين مطربا ثم مونولوجست، ذلك الفن الذي اندثر بعد أن كان يرصد وينقض الظواهر الاجتماعية السائدة في ذلك العصر. قدم إسماعيل ياسين إلي القاهرة في بدايات الثلاثينيات لكي يبحث عن مشواره الفني كمطرب، إلا أن شكله وخفة ظله حجبا عنه النجاح في الغناء، وقد امتلك إسماعيل الصفات التي جعلت منه نجما من نجوم الإستعراض حيث أنه مطرب ومونولوجست وممثل، وظل أحد رواد هذا الفن علي امتداد عشر سنوات من عام 1935- 1945 ثم عمل بالسينما وأصبح أحد أبرز نجومها وهو ثاني إثنين في تاريخ السينما أنتجت لهما أفلام بأسمائهما بعد ليلي مراد، ومن هذه الأفلام (إسماعيل ياسين في متحف الشمع - إسماعيل ياسين يقابل ريا وسكينة - إسماعيل ياسين في الجيش - إسماعيل ياسين في البوليس – إسماعيل ياسين في الطيران – إسماعيل ياسين في البحرية – إسماعيل ياسين في مستشفي المجانين..إلخ). 

== استمرارية إسماعيل ياسين ==