'''Miodio''' (oder ''Mi Odio'') ist eine italienische und san-marinesische Band, bestehend aus den Mitgliedern Bass und Programming), Francesco Sancisi (Keyboard und Programming) sowie Alessandro Gobbi (Schlagzeug). Die Band wurde 2002 gegründet. Drei der Bandmitglieder sind Italiener, die anderen beiden aus San Marino. 

== Bandgeschichte ==
2006 nahmen Miodio ihre erste EP ''Miodio'' auf, die fünf Tracks enthielt und von dem Single ''It's Ok'', die auf über einhundert lokalen Radiosendern gespielt wurde. Der Song ist auch auf dem Soundtrack des Filmes ''Il Soffio dell’Anima'' enthalten. 

Miodio vertraten San Marino beim Eurovision Song Contest 2008 in Belgrad, Serbien, mit ihrem Song ''Complice''. Es war die erste Teilnahme San Marinos bei dem Wettbewerb. Die Band wurde in einem nationalen Vorentscheid unter insgesamt 50 Bewerbern von einer siebenköpfigen Expertenjury ausgewählt, die der den Wettbewerb übertragende san-marinesische Fernsehsender SMRTV zusammengestellt hatte. Miodio erreichte im ersten Halbfinale des ESC am 20. Mai 2008 mit nur fünf Punkten den letzten Platz unter 19 Halbfinalsteilnehmern und konnte sich damit nicht für das am 24. Mai 2008 stattfindende Finale qualifizieren. 

Die Band nimmt zur Zeit ihr erstes Album auf, das elf Tracks enthalten und im Sommer 2008 erscheinen wird. 

== Preise== 
Miodio gewannen das 17. San Marino Festival sowie den Preis „Viva Music“ und „Bester Originalsong“ beim Kunstfestival in Bologna 2006. Sie vertraten San Marino bei der 12. Biennale Junger Künstler in Europa in Neapel, wo die Band einen selbst produzierten und gedrehten 30-minütigen Kurzfilm zeigten, der die Anerkennung der Jury fand. 

== Diskogafie ==

'''Mi Odio''' is a band that consists of three Italian and two San Marinese members. They represented San Marino in the Eurovision Song Contest 2008, performing the song Complice. This was the first time San Marino had entered the competition.  They failied to get past the first semi-final on May 20, only receiving 5 points and placing last of 19.

Mi Odio was founded in the winter of 2002, and they have published a mini-album with 5 tracks.
This album was produced by the label “Acanto” owned by the producer and composer Andrea Felli. In 2007 they entered into an exclusive contract with Opera Prima, a record label, releasing there first single "It's Ok", which is still played by more than a hundred national radio stations. The song has been also included in the soundtrack of the movie "Il Soffio dell’Anima" and is listed in the catalogue of the prestigious and renowned iTunes Store. 

The name of the band is provocative and impressive but hides a deep reflection: "You must learn to see how much you hate yourself until you look at yourself in the mirror and see the reflection of your thoughts, you will use every person you meet as a mirror reflecting what you think of yourself…"

The group and was selected by an internal jury, after applying through an open invitation for entrants to represent San Marino.

Miodio’s music is a fusion of state-of-the-art instruments, cutting-edge technology, pushy but always refined electronic sounds and a breathtaking stage act delivering a strong emotional impact. 

Miodio are the winners of the 17th edition of San Marino Festival as well as the winners of the prize 'Viva Music' and 'Best Original Song' at the 2006 Arts Festival in Bologna. They also represented San Marino at the 12th Biennial of Young Artists of Europe held in Naples, where the band presented a 30-minute filmshot, edited and produced by themselves and praised by an international jury. 

The band is recording their first proper album containing eleven tracks, which will be released in the summer of 2008. 

==Eurovision Song Contest 2008==
In 2008, Miodio was announced as 2008 contest. They were selected internally by Sammarinese broadcaster San Marino RTV with their song Complice, written by band members Francesco Sancisi and Nicola Della Valle. They participated in Belgrade, Serbia, at the first semi-final against 18 other countries. They, however, did not get enough points from the other countries and did not pass to the final.