'''Ed Gardner''' (Astoriassa New Yorkin osavaltiossa. Hänen tunnetuin teoksensa on radiokuunnelma Duffy's Tavern, jossa hän myös esitti päähenkilö Archieta.

Ennen show-alalle ryhtymistään Gardner toimi J. Walter Thompson -mainostoimiston edustajana. Hän alkoi tuottaa näyttämölle 1930-luvun alussa. Vuonna 1931 hän tuotti Broadway-draaman Coastwise ja vuonna 1934 Broadway-komedian After Such Pleasures, jonka myös käsikirjoitti.
 <!---But he found his fame with Duffy's Tavern, playing the wisecracking, malaprop-prone barkeep Archie on the radio hit. It aired on CBS from 1941 to 1942, on NBC Blue Network from 1942 to 1944 and NBC from 1944 to 1952. Speaking in a nasal Brooklyn accent, and sounding like just about every working class New Yorker his creator had ever known, Gardner as Archie invariably began each week's show by answering the telephone and saying, "Duffy's Tavern, where the elite meet to eat, Archie the manager speaking, Duffy ain't here---oh, hello, Duffy."

Duffy the owner never appeared, but Archie did, with Gardner assuming the role himself after he couldn't find the right actor to play the role. Regulars in the tavern included Duffy's airheaded, man-crazy daughter, Eddie the droll waiter, and Finnegan the barfly, not to mention Clancy the cop. The daughter was played by several actresses but began with Shirley Booth, Gardner's first wife, with whom he remained friends even after their 1942 divorce.

Gardner also brought radio directing experience to Duffy's Tavern. He had previously originated the Rudy Vallee-John Barrymore radio show and directed shows for George Burns and Gracie Allen, Bing Crosby, Ripley's Believe It or Not, Al Jolson and Fanny Brice. In addition, Gardner was one of the show's writers and its script editor in all but name; though he had a staff that included Abe Burrows, Sol Saks, Parke Levy, Larry Rhine, and Dick Martin, and was notorious for hiring as a writer anyone who'd sounded funny to him in passing, Gardner ultimately had the final say on each show's script.

'''Ed Gardner''' (American comic director, best remembered as the creator and star of the radio hit ''Duffy's Tavern''.

Born in Astoria, stage in the early 1930s. He produced the drama play ''Coastwise'' on Broadway (1931) and wrote and directed the Broadway comedy ''After Such Pleasures'' (1934).

But he found his fame with ''Duffy's Tavern'', playing the wisecracking, malaprop-prone barkeep Archie on the radio hit. It aired on NBC Blue Network from 1942 to 1944 and NBC from 1944 to 1952. Speaking in a nasal Brooklyn accent, and sounding like just about every working class New Yorker his creator had ever known, Gardner as Archie invariably began each week's show by answering the telephone and saying, "Duffy's Tavern, where the elite meet to eat, Archie the manager speaking, Duffy ain't here---oh, hello, Duffy." 

Duffy the owner never appeared, but Archie did, with Gardner assuming the role himself after he couldn't find the right actor to play the role. Regulars in the tavern included Duffy's airheaded, man-crazy daughter, Eddie the droll waiter, and Finnegan the barfly, not to mention Clancy the cop. The daughter was played by several actresses but began with Shirley Booth, Gardner's first wife, with whom he remained friends even after their 1942 divorce. 

Gardner also brought radio directing experience to ''Duffy's Tavern''. He had previously originated the Rudy Vallee-John Barrymore radio show and directed shows for George Burns and Gracie Allen, Bing Crosby, ''Ripley's Believe It or Not'', Al Jolson and Fanny Brice. In addition, Gardner was one of the show's writers and its script editor in all but name; though he had a staff that included Abe Burrows, Sol Saks, Parke Levy, Larry Rhine, and Dick Martin, and was notorious for hiring as a writer anyone who'd sounded funny to him in passing, Gardner ultimately had the final say on each show's script.