'''Russian salad''' or '''salade russe''' (also known as '''Salade Olivier''' in diced vegetables and sometimes meats bound in Persian or "oliv'e" or "оливье" (olivye) in Russian.

==Ingredients==
In modern usage, it is usually simply boiled diced vegetables bound in mayonnaise, very similar to some versions of macédoine de légumes froid. Earlier, it always included cold meat such as tongue, or fish.  The mid-20th century restaurant version involves not just vegetables, but also pickled tongue, sausage, lobster meat, truffles, ''etc.'' garnished with capers, anchovy filets, ''etc.'' Some versions mold it in aspic.

thumb|250px|A homemade variant of the Russian Salad containing carrots, ham, onions, pickled gherkins, eggs, sweetcorn, cucumber, peas, potato and mayonnaise

==History==
The original version of the salad was invented in the 1860s by Lucien Olivier, the chef of the ''Hermitage'' restaurant, one of Moscow's most celebrated restaurants. Olivier's salad quickly became immensely popular with Hermitage regulars, and perhaps, the restaurant's signature dish.  The exact recipe -- particularly that of the dressing -- was a jealously guarded secret, but it is known that the salad contained grouse, veal tongue, caviar, lettuce, crayfish tails, capers, gherkins, cucumbers, hardboiled eggs and soy beans.  Other reported ingredients included truffles, cubed aspic and smoked duck, although it is possible that the recipe was varied seasonally.  However, the dish certainly did not contain potatoes -- the main ingredient in today's Salade Russe a/k/a Salade Olivier.

At the turn of the 19th century, one of Olivier's rus: ''"Столичный"'', "The Capital Salad"). It was reported by gourmands at the time, however, that the dressing on the Stolychnyj salad was of a lower quality than Olivier's in that it was "missing something". The original Olivier dressing was a type of mayonnaise, made with French wine vinegar, mustard, and Provencal olive oil; its exact recipe, however, remains unknown.

Later, Ivanov sold the recipe for the salad to various publishing houses, which further contributed to its popularization.  Due to the closure of the Hermitage restaurant in 1905 and the Olivier family's departure from Russia, the salad could now be referred to as "Olivier".  As inevitably happens with gourmet recipes which become popularized, those of the salad's ingredients that were rare, expensive, seasonal, or difficult to prepare were gradually replaced with cheaper and more readily available foods, until it evolved (or ''devolved'') into the dish we know today.

==Modern Olivier==
Today's popular version of "Salade Olivier" -- containing boiled potatoes, pickles, peas, eggs, carrots, onions, and bologna or boiled meat, dressed with mayonnaise -- is a bastardized version of Ivanov's Stolychnyj salad, and only faintly resembles Olivier's original creation. This version was a staple of any Soviet Russian holiday dinner, especially of a Soviet Champagne and Moroccan Tangerines), due to availability of components in winter. Even though more exotic foods are widely available in Russia now, its popularity has hardly diminished. It is also very popular in Iran, where chicken is very often added to the recipe. Because of French influence on Spanish cuisine, it is also widely consumed in Spain (where it is called ''ensaladilla rusa'' and popular as a Summer meal) and typically consists of carrots, canned tuna, eggs, peas, roast red pepper strips, green olives, potato and mayonnaise.

Een '''huzarensalade''' is een appel, ui.  Mayonaise wordt naast de salade geserveerd. 

===Eenvoudige salade===
In een huzarensalade moeten niet teveel verschillende ingrediënten zitten. De salade moet zo simpel mogelijk zijn. Een huzarensalade bevat de volgende ingrediënten: aardappel, rundvlees (bijvoorkeur kalfsvlees), appel, augurk, eventueel een ui (of zilveruitjes) en wordt aangemaakt met Franse dressing (vinaigrette), geserveerd met wat garnituur, een beetje mayonaise en toast. De ingrediënten moeten in juiste verhouding met elkaar zijn: niet te veel aardappel of te weinig rundvlees. De salade wordt nogal eens gemaakt van restjes, dat is eigenlijk niet de bedoeling. De ingrediënten moeten zo vers mogelijk zijn. Verder mag de salade niet geprakt worden (wat vaak gebeurt) het moeten gelijkmatige vierkante stukjes zijn, zodat de salade structuur heeft. 

Ingrediënten die je nogal eens aantreft in een huzarensalade zijn doperwten, ham, ei. Van oorsprong horen deze ingrediënten niet in de salade thuis. Er mag ook geen mayonaise in de salade zitten, die moet ernaast worden geserveerd.

===Waar komt de naam vandaan?===
De huzaren waren van oorsprong Hongaarse ruiters, die in de Keizerlijke Oostenrijkse legers ten strijde trokken tegen de Turken. Huzaren werden vooral ingezet om vijandelijk gebied te verkennen. Eenmaal tussen de vijand moesten ze onopgemerkt zien te blijven. Een vuurtje stoken om te koken was daarmee onmogelijk. Daarom namen de huzaren vooraf bereid voedsel mee. Door dit voedsel te mengen ontstond een koude salade, die werd al snel ‘huzarensalade’ genoemd. .