The '''Keswick Convention''' is an annual gathering of evangelical Keswick, in the English county of Cumbria. 

== History ==
The Keswick Convention began in 1875 as a catalyst and focal point for the emerging Higher Life movement in the United Kingdom.  It was founded by the Anglican T. D. Harford-Battersby and the Quaker Robert Wilson.  The first Keswick Convention had over four hundred in attendance.  They met under the banner of "All One in Christ Jesus" which is still the Convention's watchword.

Among the Keswick Convention's early leading lights were Anglicans J. W. Webb-Peploe, Evan Henry Hopkins, William Haslam, W. Hay M. H. Aitken, and Handley Moule, as well as the Baptist Frederick Brotherton Meyer.

Another frequent speaker in the early years was Hudson Taylor, founder of the China Inland Mission. Amy Carmichael heard Taylor speak there and decided to dedicate her life to missionary work.

In 1903 Barclay Buxton and Paget Wilkes founded the Japan Evangelistic Band at the Convention.

John George Govan, who was to go on to found the Faith Mission in Scotland, was influenced by the Convention as well. 

It was Stephen Olford who introduced Billy Graham to the Keswick message at a Keswick Convention in 1946 over a period of days of Bible study and prayer in a hotel room.  This teaching gave Billy Graham the assurance of God's power in his life, which Billy said in his autobiography, "Just As I Am," came to him as a second blessing, and which has empowered his preaching ever since.

== Modern Format  ==
=== Convention Weeks' Format ===
In the 21st century, the annual Convention is still centered in a large purpose-built tent erected over a concrete showground with audio-visual facilities to aid praise and teaching. The venue is entered via the Convention Centre: a narrow block containing offices, a small shop etc. Additionally, events take place around Keswick in the convention's own Rawnsley Centre and local churches and meeting halls.

'''开西大会'''（'''Keswick Convention'''）是一个一年一度在英格兰坎布里亚郡（Cumbria）凯西克（Keswick, Cumbria）举行的福音派基督徒聚会。 

开西大会开始于1875年，是英国较高生命运动（Higher Life movement）的催化剂和焦点，创立者是圣公会的T. D. Harford-Batters和贵格会的Robert Wilson。第一次开西大会有400多人参加。他们在“在耶稣基督里是一”（All One in Christ Jesus）的旗帜下聚集。

开西大会早期的重要人物有圣公会的J. W. Webb-Peploe, Evan Henry Hopkins, William Haslam, W. Hay M. H. Aitken，Handley Moule,以及浸信会的Frederick Brotherton Meyer。

另一位早期经常讲道的讲员是中国内地会的创办人戴德生。贾艾梅（Amy Carmichael）在这里听见戴德生的讲道，因而决定献身于传教工作。

1886年，John George Govan在苏格兰成立信心差会（Faith Mission），也是受到开西大会的影响。 

Stephen Olford在1946年的开西大会的圣经研读和祷告期间，在一个旅馆房间内，将开西的信息介绍给葛培理。这些教导使得葛培理在生活中确信上帝的力量，葛培理在自传中说<!-- ，"Just As I Am," came to him as a second blessing, and which has empowered his preaching ever since. -->

<!-- == Modern Format ==
=== Convention Weeks' Format === -->
在21世纪，每年的大会仍然集中在大型的特别建造的混凝土展览场地上树起的帐篷里，装备了视听设备以帮助敬拜和教导。进入场地要经过大会中心，一个包括办公室的狭窄部份，一个小商店等。此外还在凯西克附近大会的Rawnsley中心和当地教会、聚会所举行活动。