'''Finley Quaye''' (britânico. Quando ganhou, em 1998 o Brit Award para Melhor Artista Britânico a Solo, ele era famoso há menos de um ano. Em 1997, ele surgiu do nada com um fantastico mix de Reggae, Soul e jazzy Funk e tomou o trono do Dance Pop, ocupado previamente por Jamiroquai.     

Filho de Cab Quaye compositor de Jazz, irmão do famoso guitarrista Caleb e alegadamente tio do artista de Trip Hop, Tricky, ele fez a sua primeira aparição em 1995 com A Guy Called Gerald's "Finley's Rainbow". Realizou um solo com Haiku e nos finais de 1997, atingiu o top 20 britânico duas vezes com "Sunday Shining", um descontraido cover de Bob Marley e "Even After All". A sua reputação ficou estabelecida com ''Maverick A Strike'', um álbum aventureiro mas acessível, que atingiu o Ouro menos de três semanas depois de lançado tendo-o levado directamente á victoria do Brit Award.    

No entanto, não se augurava nada de bom quando Tricky - com quem tinha colaborado no fim de 1997   em "Please Share My Dappy Umbrella", contando também com Iggy Pop - o culpou no seu "Can't Freestyle".

Em 2004 a música "Dice", feita conjuntamente com William Orbit, e contando com Beth Orton fez um pouco de sucesso, ajudada em parte pela sua inclusão na trilha sonora de The O.C..

'''Finley Quaye''' (born UK<ref>[http://www.bbc.co.uk/scotland/musicscotland/thevault/biogs/index.shtml?q/quaye_finley BBC Music]</ref>) is a British BRIT Award for Best British Male Solo Artist. 

==Life==
Quaye is the brother of noted guitarist, Caleb Quaye and jazz musician Terri Quaye.

Born in Edinburgh, Quaye went to school in London, Manchester and Edinburgh. However, he left school with no qualifications. Before making records he took employment spraying cars, smoking fish, making futons and as a stage-rigger and scaffolder.

His father was born in London, but considered himself as African.  Although known as Cab Kaye his full name was Nii Lante Augustus Kwamlah Quaye. Kaye was the son of the pianist Caleb Jonas Quaye a.k.a Mope Desmond, who was born in Accra, Ghana. Kaye did not grow up with his father and only found out, in his twenties, about his father's history as a musician. Mope Desmond, Cab Kaye and Finley Quaye have all played Glasgow's Barrowlands, Wolverhampton's Wulfrun Hall and London's Cafe d'Paris. 

Finley was inspired early on in his childhood by jazz musicians, Pete King and band when he met his father for the first time in Amsterdam.

==Career==
He made a solo record deal with New York. He began working with Epic/UK Top 20 twice with "Sunday Shining", and "Even After All".  His reputation was established by ''Maverick A Strike'', an adventurous but accessible gold less than three weeks later, and led directly to the BRIT Award victory. ''Maverick A Strike'' is now multi platinum. Two more albums were released on Epic, ''Vanguard'' (2000) and ''Much More Than Much Love'' (2004). In 2004 the song "Dice", in collaboration with hit, helped in part by its inclusion on ''Music from the OC: Mix 1''. Quaye has been living and working in Berlin since 2005.

He is currently working with on a new album with A Guy Called Gerald & The Stereo MCs. Finley recorded "Pound For Pound" in 2007 with Reggae veteran Norman Grant of The Twinkle Brothers featuring Sly Dunbar and Lloyd Parks. In the past he has worked with Osibisa, both on stage and in the studio, with Iggy Pop, Tricky, Primal Scream, Lee Scratch Perry and Buju Banton.