thumb|400px|Michael Palin as one of the "Knights Who Say Ni"
The '''Knights Who Say Ni!''' are a band of knights from the comedy film ''Monty Python and the Holy Grail'', feared for the manner in which they utter the word "ni" (, like ''knee'' but clipped short).<ref name=CA></ref> 

== Details ==

The Knights are led by a man who is approximately 12 feet tall with disproportionately short arms and reindeer antlers inserted into his helmet (played by John's shoulders). The other Knights are of normal human dimensions and act as a chorus, only repeating words and phrases that the head Knight has spoken.

"Ni!" is only the most notable of the sacred words which they are assigned to protect; the others being "Peng" and "Neee-wom". All of these words are infamous for the palpable horror and fear they bring about, whether delivered by the Knights or not.

The Knights demand that King Arthur bring them a shrubbery in order to pass through a patch of woodland which they guard. They require that it must be one that looks nice and not too expensive. As a result, Arthur and his companions return to a nearby village where they purchase a shrubbery from "Roger the Shrubber" (played by Eric Idle). Later, the Knights of Ni become the Knights of an odd string of syllables (although the knights apart from the head knight continue to say 'Ni'). The saying is spelled the following way according to the "script" subtitles available on the collector's edition DVD: "Ekke Ekke Ekke Ekke Ptang Zoo Boing (unintelligible muttering)"!

Because of the challenging pronunciation, King Arthur simply refers to them as "The Knights Who 'Til Recently Said Ni". Originally, the name was to be changed to "the Knights Who Go Ni... Whom... Ping."

Later, the Knights demand that King Arthur get them another shrubbery, and arrange the two shrubberies so that they get a two-level effect ("...with a little path running down the middle"), and to "...cut down the mightiest tree in the forest with... a herring!" Arthur refuses, claiming that such a feat cannot be done, to which the Knights reply "Oh, please?"

The Knights have a weakness in that a number of words, when spoken to them, cause them pain and agony. The only one of these words that is revealed in the film is the word "it". This apparently contradicts the earlier conversation, in which "it" is said, yet the Knights do not appear to be affected.

There was a further scene that was scripted, but was either cut or never filmed. In it, the Knights recovered from having "it" said, and when they hear someone else coming, they decide that they will demand another shrubbery, this time calling themselves the "Knights of Nicky-Nicky".

'''Riddarna som säger Ni''', engelska ''The Knights who say Ni'', är ett par figurer i Monty Pythons galna värld. 

==Handling==
Kung Arthur och Sir Bedevere the Wise möter dem i en dunkel och mystisk skog. Riddarna som säger Ni klär sig i svarta rustningar och hjälmar med vad som ser ut som djurhorn på. Dom leds av en tämligen lång riddare (spelad av Michael Palin, ståendes på en stege). Dom är väktare till dom heliga orden "Ni-Peng" och "Niiii-whooom" (finns andra tolkningar beroende på uttal). Dom är fruktade för deras torterande användning av dessa ord (fast dom brukar nöja sig med att säga "Ni!"). Enligt Arthur är det få som överlever ett möte med dessa riddare. Men då både Kung Arthur och Sir Bedevere använder ordet "Ni!" senare för att pressa en äldre dam på information, framkommer det att ordet är fruktat oavsett vem som säger det.

Riddarna av Ni hotar Kung Arthur och Sir Bedevere till livet, då dom försöker korsa skogen i vilken Riddarna av Ni befinner sig i. För att låta dom gå igenom skogen kräver Riddarna av Ni ett offer, nämligen ett buskage (shrubbery).

Efter vissa svårigheter lyckas de föra ett buskage till Riddarna, som då tillkännager att dom bytt identitet, till det något svårutalade "Riddarna som säger Ekke Ekke Ekke Ekke Ptang Zoo Boing,(följt av ohörbart mummel). Bör noteras att vissa av Riddarna som tills alldeles nyligen sa "Ni!" tycks ha svårt att hålla sig till dom nya reglerna.