'''Noites Brancas''' é uma obra do escritor Fiódor Dostoiévski. O livro que mais aproxima Dostoiévski do romantismo, foi escrito em 1848, antes de sua prisão. 

Como personagem central se tem o Sonhador, que em uma das noites brancas da capital São Petersburgo apaixona-se por Nástienka. Nesta obra, diferentemente de outras, em que a preocupação social é a diretriz para o enredo, desta vez encontramos um Dostoiévski romântico, lúdico. O personagem principal, que ao contrário das versões teatrais e cinematográficas, não tem nome, vaga errante pela "noite branca" de São Petersburgo. 

"Noite branca" refere-se a um fenômeno comum na Europa em que, mesmo à noite, o sol não chega a se pôr completamente, causando uma atmosfera onírica. Um encontro casual muda completamente a vida do até então solitário protagonista: conhece a ingênua e também sonhadora Nástienka, que aos prantos, espera aquele a quem um ano antes tivera prometido o seu amor. 

Ao longo das quatro noites seguintes, o protagonista se apaixona pela moça e conhece a sua inusitada história: Nástienka vive atada com um alfinete à saia da avó cega e ao lado da criada surda. Quando um novo inquilino chega a sua casa, ela vê a possibilidade de escapar de sua solidão. O misterioso homem um dia deixa a casa, prometendo que voltaria depois de um ano, quando tivesse condições de casar-se com ela. Quando o protagonista encontra Nástienka na ponte sobre o rio Nieva, estamos exatamente no dia marcado para o reencontro. Mas nenhum dos três personagens pode prever o que o destino preparou para eles. Essa obra teve várias adaptações para o teatro. No Brasil, recentemente , Débora Falabella e Luís Artur, foram dirigidos por Yara de Novaes.

'''"White Nights"''' is a Russian short story by Fyodor Dostoevsky, originally published in 1848,  early in the writer's career. Film adaptations have been made by Italian director Luchino Visconti, by French director Robert Bresson (as ''Four Nights of a Dreamer''), by Iranian director Farzad Motamen (as ''Shabhaye Roshan'') and by Indian film directors Manmohan Desai (''Chhalia'' (1960)), Sanjay Leela Bhansali (''Saawariya''), and Jananadhan (''iyarkai'').

==Plot==
Like many of Dostoevsky's stories, "White Nights" is told in first person by a nameless narrator who lives alone in a city and suffers from loneliness. The short story is divided into six sections:

===First Night===
The story opens with a quotation by Ivan Turgenev 

::"And was it his destined part
::Only one moment in his life
::To be close to your heart?
::Or was he fated from the start
::to live for just one fleeting instant,
::within the purlieus of your heart."

The narrator describes his experience walking in the streets of St. Petersburg. He loves the city at night time during which he feels comfortable in the city. He retells the story of his relationship with a young girl called Nastenka (a diminutive of the name Anastasia). He first sees her standing against a railing and waiting. There is something special about her and he is very curious but she walks away when she sees him. When he hears her scream, he intervenes and saves her from a man who is harassing her. The girl would tell him her story and be with him provided that it does not lead into romance. When the time comes to an end and she has to go home she tells him she will be waiting tomorrow in the same place. She too is as lonely as the narrator.

===Second Night===
On their second meeting, Nastenka introduces herself to him and the two become friends by relating to each other. In a precursor to a similar speech in Notes from Underground, the narrator gives a verbose speech about his longing for companionship leading Nastenka to comment, '...you talk as if you were reading from a book'. At the end of his moving speech, Nastenka sympathetically assures him that she would be his friend.

===Nastenka's Story===
The third part is Nastenka relating her life story to the narrator. She lived with her strict grandmother who gave her a largely sheltered upbringing. Her grandmother's pension being too small, they rent out their house to gain income. When their early lodger dies, he's replaced by a younger man closer to Nastenka's age much to her grandmother's distaste. The young man begins a silent courtship with Nastenka giving her a book often so that she may develop a reading habit. She takes a liking to the novels of Sir Walter Scott and Aleksandr Pushkin as a result. One day the young man invites her and her grandmother to the theater running The Barber of Seville. 

Upon the night that the young lodger is about to leave Petersburg for Moscow, Nastenka escapes her Grandmother and urges him to marry her. He refuses immediate marriage stating that he does not have money to support them but he assures her that he would return for her exactly a year later. Nastenka finishes her story at the end of this, noting that a year has gone and he hasn't sent her a single letter.

===Third Night===
The narrator gradually realizes that despite his assurance that their friendship would remain platonic, he has inevitably fallen in love with her. But he nevertheless helps her by writing and posting a letter to her lover and hides away his feelings for her. They await his reply for the letter or his appearance but gradually Nastenka grows restless at his absence. She takes comfort in the narrator's friendship and unaware of the depth of his feelings for her she states that 'I love you so, because you haven't fallen in love with me.' The narrator, despairing due to the unrequited nature of his love for her, notes that he has now begun to feel alienated from her as well.