right|thumb|300px|David Greenglass.
'''David Greenglass''' (né le 2 mars 1922 à New York) était un espion atomique prétendu au service de l'URSS.

== Biographie ==
David Greenglass a été recruté dans l'espionnage soviétique par sa femme, Ethel Rosenberg, née Greenglass, et de son beau-frère, Julius Rosenberg<ref> [http://www.nsa.gov/venona/releases/14_Nov_1944_R1.gif]</ref>. Les Rosenberg ont été exécutés en 1953 après avoir été jugés pour trahison et espionnage, après avoir vendu les secrets atomiques américains. David Greenglass partageait l'intérêt des Rosenberg pour le communisme.

Né le 2 mars 1922, David Greenglass s'est marié avec Ruth (née Printz) en Mississippi, David Greenglass fut promu sergent et assigné au Projet Manhattan, un projet secret visant à développer les premières armes atomiques. Il fut d'abord affecté à l'usine d'laboratoire de Los Alamos. Il raconta qu'il avait dormi durant le premier test de la bombe atomique, et qu'il avait fabriqué des diamants artificiels au laboratoire.

Après que Julius Rosenberg a dit à Ruth que le Projet Manhattan cherchait à produire la première bombe atomique, David commença à transmettre des secrets à l'URSS, en passant par Julius, de novembre 1944 jusqu'à ce qu'il quitte l'armée en NSA entre 1944 et quelquefois dans les années 70, David et sa femme Ruth avaient des noms de code. David fut appelé "''KALIBR''" et Ruth "''OSA''"<ref>http://www.nsa.gov/venona/releases/14_Nov_1944_R1.gif</ref>. Divid se défendit devant le tribunal, déclarant que quand il avait commencé son travail, l'URSS était encore un allié des guerre, son frère Bernie et Julius Rosenberg eurent un petit commerce de machines à Manhattan, qui ferma en 1947.

En $ pour financer une fuite à Mexico. Mais ils allèrent dans les Montagnes Catskill à la place, et utilisèrent l'argent pour se procurer des conseils juridiques.

David Greenglass fut arrêté par le FBI pour espionnage le 15 juin 1950, et il impliqua rapidement les Rosenberg. Il a explicitement nié que sa sœur, Ethel Rosenberg, ait été impliquée dans son témoignage de février précédent, mais, en août, il changea de version pour ajouter que c'était Ethel qui avait tapée les notes qu'il avait prises. Il témoigna encore contre sa sœur et son mari devant le tribunal en 1951, en échange d'une immunité pour Ruth. En échange de ce témoignage, le gouvernement permit à Ruth de rester chez elle afin de s'occuper de ses deux enfants. Bien qu'elle ait été une des participantes à ce réseau d'espionnage, elle ne fut jamais arrêtée, inculpée ou poursuivie pour ces faits. David dit à la Cour <ref></ref>

=====Le témoignage des Greeglass=====

Selon Rodosh et Milton, 

Dès le début du procès,  et avaient peur que l'avocat de Rosenberg les fasse parler sur ce point par simple vengeance.  

David Greenglass dessina deux lentille (de mémoire) et Walter Koski, l'expert de l'accusation, fut appelé à la barre. 

Cependant,  (Radosh et Milton, pp. 136-139).

right|thumb|200px|Un dessin de Greenglass d'une explosion atomique, illustrant ce qu'il est censé avoir donné aux [[Ethel et Julius Rosenberg|Rosenberg pour qu'ils la transmettent à l'URSS.]]

right|thumb|300px|Mugshot of David Greenglass.
'''David Greenglass''' (b.  in New York City) was an atomic spy for the Soviet Union.
==Biography==
David Greenglass was recruited into Soviet espionage by his wife, conspiracy to commit espionage with regard to American atomic secrets. Greenglass shared an interest in Communism with the Rosenbergs.

Born on Ruth (née Printz) in 1942, when she was only 17 years old.  The two joined the Los Alamos laboratory in New Mexico. He later related how he slept through the first test of the atomic bomb and made artificial diamonds at the laboratory.

After Julius Rosenberg told Ruth that the Manhattan Project was seeking to produce the first atomic bomb, David began to pass nuclear secrets to the Soviet Union via Julius from November 1944 until he left the military in 1946. According to the Venona project intercepts decrypted by the NSA between 1944 and sometime in the 1970s, both David and his wife Ruth were given code names.  David was codenamed "KALIBR" and Ruth "OSA."<ref>http://www.nsa.gov/venona/releases/14_Nov_1944_R1.gif</ref>  He defended himself in court by stating that when he began his work, the Soviet Union was still an ally of the United States. After the war Greenglass, his brother Bernie, and Julius Rosenberg ran a small machine shop in Manhattan, which had failed by 1947.

In 1950, UK and US intelligence agencies had discovered that a Los Alamos theoretical physicist, Klaus Fuchs, had also been a spy for the USSR during the war. Through Fuchs' confession, they found that one of his American contacts had been a man from Brooklyn named Harry Gold.  Gold had then passed Fuchs' information on to a Soviet agent, Anatoli Yakovlev, who then would pass it on to his controllers in the USSR. Through Gold, the FBI's trail led to Greenglass and the Rosenbergs, who had allegedly also used Gold as a courier. When Fuchs was first captured, Julius allegedly gave the Greenglasses $5,000 to finance an escape to Mexico. But they went to the Catskills instead and used the money to seek out legal advice.

David Greenglass was arrested by the FBI for espionage in June 1950 and quickly implicated the Rosenbergs. He had explicitly denied his sister Ethel Rosenberg's involvement in his Grand Jury testimony in February 1950, but in August 1950 he changed his testimony to claim that Ethel had typed up his notes.  He testified against his sister and her husband in court in 1951 as part of an immunity agreement.  In exchange for that testimony, the government allowed Ruth to stay with their two children.  She was named a co-conspirator, but never was arrested, indicted or prosecuted. David  told the court, "I had a kind of hero worship there with Julius Rosenberg and I did not want my hero to fail..."

right|thumb|200px|Greenglass's sketch of an implosion-type [[nuclear weapon design, illustrating what he supposedly gave the Rosenbergs to pass on to the Soviet Union.]]

During his testimony in 1951, Greenglass related in detail the secrets he passed on to the Soviet Union through Julius and Gold. He described his work on the implosion lenses used for the "Trinity" test and the bomb used on Nagasaki, "Atomic Energy Commission decided that the "implosion" concept could be declassified for the trial, and limited all discussion to the weapons used in World War II (fearing that Greenglass may have seen prototypes for future weapons while at Los Alamos).  As a result of a surprise defense motion that all testimony about the alleged "secret of the atomic bomb" be impounded, Federal Judge Irving Kaufman at first made all spectators and news reporters leave the room when Greenglass began testifying about his "secrets".  Ten minutes later Judge Irving invited the news reporters back in, asking them to use their discretion in reporting on Greenglass's testimony.  Defense attorney Bloch's effort to convince the jury that he and his clients were concerned about issues of national security failed.  The Greenglass testimony, later seen to be crude and in the words of many scientists who examined it "worthless" remained sealed until 1966.  Greenglass also testified that Rosenberg had stolen and given to the Russians a proximity fuze and information about a speculative space platform which would sit between the Earth and the Moon.

During the trial, Bloch claimed Greenglass wanted revenge for their business failure and attempted to discredit his character and testimony (a legal tactic which failed with the jury). Greenglass was sentenced to 15 years in prison, served 10 years, and later reunited with his wife. 

After his release in 1960, the Greenglasses lived in New York City under an assumed name. In 1996, Greenglass recanted his sworn testimony in an interview with New York Times reporter Sam Roberts, claiming that he had lied under oath about the extent of his sister Ethel's involvement in the plot in order to protect his wife, Ruth. At the trial, Greenglass had testified that Ethel Rosenberg typed his notes to give to the Russians, though he now intimated that it had been Ruth who did the typing.  Greenglass explained, "Look, I had a wife and two children. I didn’t care so much what happened to me, but I cared what happened to them.” When Roberts asked Greenglass if he would have done anything differently, he replied, "Never".

Some former Soviet intelligence agents have claimed that they believed Ethel was not an active part of Julius' espionage ring, and Greenglass' crude drawings were not very useful to them since they already possessed Klaus Fuchs' superior information, though this has been disputed by other intelligence records and the statements of Nikita Kruschev, and no explanation has yet been made as to why Soviet intelligence later secretly recommended the Rosenbergs for a Soviet medal for acts unrelated to espionage.