thumb|250px|right|The Space Rangers' Zords: MegaV-1, MegaV-2, MegaV-3, MegaV-4, MegaV-5, and MegaWinger
The Ganymede most of the time.

==Astro Megaship==
In ''Power Rangers in Space'', didn't initially have individual Zords.  Instead, the '''Astro Megaship''', which the Rangers used to travel through space, transformed into their primary Megazord.  It could only do this with the addition of the '''NASADA Space Shuttle'''/'''Astro Megashuttle''' that the Turbo Rangers brought with them from Earth and a black box of Zordon's that Alpha 6 decoded.  The Megaship was armed with the '''Mega Lasers''', which could be used to fire on Velicofighters.

The ship had an onboard computer named D.E.C.A. that communicated with the Rangers about the ship's functionality. It spoke with a woman's voice (voiced by Julie Maddalena).

Some time before the events of ''Mike and Leo Corbett. It was used as the Rangers' transport throughout the season, and seen in battle once more as the Astro Megazord when the Space Rangers teamed up with the Galaxy Rangers to fight the restored Psycho Pink.

When Terra Venture came under attack by Trakeena's forces and crash landed on a nearby moon, the Rangers used the Astro Megaship in an attempt to distract Trakeena's ship, the Scorpion Stinger, from interfering with the evacuation of Terra Venture. The Rangers, having no other choice, self-destructed the Astro Megaship when it was caught in a pincer by the Scorpion Stinger.

Sometime later, during the episode ''Forever Red'', a newer Astro Megaship was revealed, having been built on the shipyards of KO-35, and was the transport for the ten Red Rangers to the moon for their mission to defeat the remnant of the Machine Empire. The ''Astro Megaship Mark II'', as it was called, was effectively a faster version of the original ship. The ''Mark II'' was staffed by a robot Alpha 7, who effectively was the personality of Alpha 5 in  a body made up of pieces of both Alpha 5 and Alpha 6. However, whether the ''Mark II'' had its own version of D.E.C.A. or whether it could have transformed into a new Astro Megazord was not explored further.

The Astro Megaship is also the first command center that becomes a Megazord this would be repeated again in ''Power Rangers: S.P.D.'' with the Delta Base becoming the Delta Command Megazord. It is also the first traveling command center along with the Mega Tank, this would also be repeated again in ''Power Rangers: Ninja Storm'' with the Mobile Command Center, ''Power Rangers: Dino Thunder'' with the Triceramax Command Center Truck, and ''S.P.D.'' with the Delta Command Crawler which is transformed from the Delta Base and transforms into the Delta Command Megazord.

===Astro Megazord===
The '''Astro Megazord''' was armed with the '''Astro Megazord Blaster''', the '''Astro Megazord Saber''' and the '''Astro Megazord Shield'''. The Saber had multiple uses. First, it could be charged with energy and be used to deliver any number of powered-up slashes to the enemy. Also, it could unleash a '''Laser Whip''' to tie up its opponents, and when sent into any monster, it could be ignited with energy to obliterate the monster.

==Delta Megaship==
In the ongoing quest to find Zordon, the Phantom Ranger gives the Space Rangers a hand when he is incapacitated after almost saving Zordon. The '''Delta Megaship''', like the Astro Megaship, is a ship capable of faster than light travel.

===Delta Megazord===
The Delta Megaship can transform into the Delta Megazord and change its hands into '''Gyro-Blasters''', or combine with the Astro Megazord to become the Astro Delta Megazord. The Delta Megazord was destroyed in battle with Red Eclipter.

===Astro Delta Megazord===
The Astro and Delta Megazords could combine to form the '''Astro Delta Megazord'''. In this mode, its main weapons were the cannons of the Delta Megazord, mounted on the shoulders. It could also launch its fists for devastating missile attacks. This was called the '''Flying Power Punch''' as a finishing move. 

The Astro Delta Megazord is the first three-piece Megazord.  This would be repeated in ''Power Rangers: Wild Force'' with the Predazord, in ''Power Rangers: Ninja Storm'' with the Storm Megazord, and again in ''Power Rangers: Dino Thunder'' with the Thundersaurus Megazord.  It would again happen in ''Power Rangers: Operation Overdrive'' with the FlashPoint Megazord and in ''Power Rangers: Jungle Fury'' with the Jungle Pride and Jungle Master Megazords.

De '''Jupiters maan Ganymede.

==Astro Megaship==
''Andros. Gecombineerd met de NASADA spaceschuttle genaamd de '''Astro Megashuttle''' kon het schip veranderen in een megazord. Het schip zelf was bewapend met lasers.

Het schip had een boordcomputer genaamd D.E.C.A. die communiceerde met de Rangers ofer de toestand van het schip.

Het Astro Megaship was de enige van de Zords uit de serie die de serie overleefde. Het schip kwam ook weer voor in de erop volgende serie ''Power Rangers: Lost Galaxy'', waarin het schip inmiddels een museum was aan boord van de ruimtekolonie Terra Venture. Het schip werd echter al snel door de nieuwe Galaxy Rangers gebruikt als primair transportmiddel. In de finale van Power Rangers: Lost Galaxy werd het schip opgeblazen om Trakeena tegen te houden.

Later, in de aflevering ''Forever Red'', verscheen een nieuwere versie van het Astro Megaship: het ''Astro Megaship Mark II''.

===Astro Megazord===
De '''Astro Megazord''' was de primaire megazord van de Rangers. Het grootste deel van de megazord werd gevormd door het Astro Megaship. Alleen het hoofd werd gevormd door de NASADA spaceshuttle. De Astro Megazord was onder andere bewapend met de '''Astro Megazord Blaster''', '''Astro Megazord Saber''' en '''Astro Megazord Shield'''. Het zwaard had meerdere functies. Zo kon het worden opgeladen met energie voor een extra sterke klap, een energiezweep vormen en naar een monster worden gegooid.

De Astro Megazord werd ook gebruikt in Psycho Ranger.

==Delta Megaship==
In hun zoektocht naar Zordon kwamen de rangers de Phantom Ranger weer tegen. Hij gaf hen het '''Delta Megaship''', een schip vrijwel identiek aan het Astro Megaship, alleen zwart gekleurd. Het schip werd echter vernietigd in een gevecht met Red Eclipter.

===Delta Megazord===
Het Delta Megaship kon transformeren in de Delta Megazord. De Delta Megazords voornaamste wapens waren de vuurwapens aan zijn handen genaamd '''Gyro-Blasters'''.

===Astro Delta Megazord===
De Astro en Delta Megazords konden combineren tot de '''Astro Delta Megazord'''. Deze megazord was bewapend met zware schouderkanonnen en kon zijn vuisten lanceren als raketten, een techniek die de '''Flying Power Punch''' werd genoemd. 