'''The Amazing Rhythm Aces''' is an American music group. The band has characterized their music as "American Music" &mdash; rock, country, blues, folk, reggae and Latino. They are best known for their 1970s hit "Third Rate Romance".

==History==
The Aces were first a local band in Knoxville, Tennessee in the late 1960s early 1970s although they went by another name. The band consisted of founding members Russell Smith, Jeff Davis, and Butch McDade. They left Knoxville for greener pastures in the early seventies.

The Aces came together in Memphis, recorded and toured with vocalist/pop, country and blue-eyed soul.

''Stacked Deck'', their debut hits, "Third Rate Romance" and "Amazing Grace (Used to Be Her Favorite Song)," the group's lone Top 10 country single. In 1976 "The End Is Not in Sight (The Cowboy Tune)," from the album ''Too Stuffed to Jump'', won a Grammy for Country Vocal Performance by a Group.

Burton left the group after the release of 1977's ''Toucan Do It Too'', and was replaced by Duncan Cameron.

In 1978, the Aces released ''Burning the Ballroom Down'', followed the next year by a self-titled effort featuring songs with Tracy Nelson and the Muscle Shoals Horns. Both albums received critical approval, but sold poorly. They released another album, ''How the Hell Do You Spell Rhythum'', before disbanding.

==Afterlife==
Smith became a successful songwriter, Earhart joined Hank Williams, Jr.'s Bama Band, and Cameron joined Sawyer Brown, a group that found significant chart success in the 1980s with a sound similar to Amazing Rhythm Aces. Hooker joined Nanci Griffith in 1987, and remains the leader of the band The Blue Moon 
Orchestra[http://www.broadjam.com/artists/artist_text.asp?artistID=37937]
A year after the release of ''Out of the Blue'', Butch McDade died after a long battle with cancer on November 29, 1998.  Barry 'Byrd' Burton went on to become a successful producer and legendary session guitarist. He released a solo instrumental country effort in 2002, titled ''Byrd Braynz'' (ADF Records).  Barry 'Byrd' Burton died on March 10, 2008 from complications of Myelodysplastic syndrome (a rare form of blood cancer)[http://www.byrdburton.com].

'''Amazing Rhythm Aces''' is een Amerikaanse country rockgroep.

De Aces kwamen in Memphis samen. Eerst met basgitarist Jeff Davis en tekstschrijver Jesse Winchester, opnames en tournees maakten. Later werden Russell Smith (piano) aangetrokken om een mix te ontwikkelen van pop, country en ''blue-eyed soul''.

In 1975 kwam hun debuutalbum ''Stacked Deck'' uit, wat resulteerde in twee hits "''Third Rate Romance''" (rock) en "''Amazing Grace (Used to Be Her Favorite Song)''" (een eenzame country Top 10 single). In 1976 won het nummer "''The End Is Not in Sight'' (The Cowboy Tune)" (van het album "''Too Stuffed to Jump''") een Grammy Award voor Country Zangprestatie door een Groep.

Nadat "''Toucan Do It Too''" utkwam in 1977, verliet Barry Burton de groep en werd vervangen door Duncan Cameron.<br/>
In datzelfde jaar speelde de Aces in het Amerikaanse muziekprogramma ''Austin City Limits'' (een hoofdbestanddeel van PBS. Butch McDade bestempelde hun muziek toen nog als ''Amerikaanse Muziek'' - Latin.

In 1978 kwam het album "''Burning the Ballroom Down''" uit en het jaar daarop kwam "''The Amazing Rhythm Aces''" uit waaraan ook Joan Baez, Tracy Nelson en de Muscle Shoals Horns meewerkten. Beide albums kregen goede kritieken, maar de verkoop was slecht. Voordat ze uitelkaar gingen, brachten ze nog een album uit "''How the Hell Do You Spell Rhythum''".