thumb|Н. К. Крупская, 1895
'''Наде́жда Константи́новна Кру́пская''' (Ульянова) (14 (Владимира Ильича Ленина. Кавалер орденов Ленина (Трудового Красного Знамени.

== Детство ==
Родилась в Петербурге в бедной дворянской семье. Отец — поручик Крупский Константин Игнатьевич (1838—1883), участвовал в подавлении польского восстания, мать — гувернантка Елизавета Васильевна Тистрова.

== 1889—1917 ==

В Ульяновым. Вместе с ним участвовала в организации и деятельности «Союза борьбы за освобождение рабочего класса». В Уфимскую губернию, но отбывала ссылку в Сибири, в селе Шушенском, где стала женой Ленина. В 1898 году вступила в РСДРП.

В Искра». Участвовала в подготовке и проведении съезда Лениным вернулась в Россию, была секретарем ЦК. После разгрома революции 1905—1907 годов отправилась во вторую эмиграцию. Работала преподавателем в партийной школе в Лонжюмо под Парижем, была секретарём Ленина и помогала налаживать связь с партийными организациями в России, принимала активное участие в работе большевистской прессы.

== 1917—1939 ==

thumb|160px|Н. К. Крупская (в центре)
В апреле Лениным вернулась в Россию. Занималась организацией социалистических союзов молодёжи, была помощницей Ленина в подготовке и проведении Октябрьского переворота. С Государственной комиссии по просвещению. В ЦК ВКП(б). В 1929 году заняла пост заместителя наркома просвещения РСФСР. Крупская стала одной из создателей советской системы народного образования, сформулировав основную задачу нового просвещения: «Школа должна не только обучать, она должна быть центром коммунистического воспитания».

На XIV съезде партии Крупская поддержала «новую оппозицию» Г. Е. Зиновьева и Л. Б. Каменева в их борьбе против И. В. Сталина, но впоследствии признала эту позицию ошибочной. До конца жизни Крупская выступала в печати и оставалась членом ЦК, ВЦИК и ЦИК СССР. Она выступала на пленумах и вполне добровольно голосовала за предание суду Н. И. Бухарина, за исключение из партии Л. Д. Троцкого, Г. Е. Зиновьева, Л. Б. Каменева. Иногда Крупская ходатайствовала за репрессированных, но большей частью безрезультатно. Крупская — автор многочисленных работ о В. И. Ленине, трудов по коммунистическому воспитанию, педагогике и истории партии большевиков. Член Президиума Верховного Совета СССР. C АН СССР. Награждена орденами Ленина и Трудового Красного Знамени.

В конце 1930-х гг. выступила инициатором кампании против К. И. Чуковского.

{{Infobox Person 
| name   = Nadezhda Krupskaya 
| image     = NadezhdaKrupskaya.jpg 
| caption  = 
| birth_date  =  
| birth_place = St. Petersburg, Russian Empire 
| dead=dead
| death_date  =  
| death_place = Moscow, Russian SFSR, Soviet Union
}}
'''Nadezhda Konstantinovna "Nadya" Krupskaya''' (, scientific transliteration ''Nadežda Konstantinovna Krupskaja'') ( - February 27, 1939)<ref>Robert H. McNeal, Bride of the Revolution (Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan Press,1972), 13.</ref>  was a Russian Bolshevik revolutionary. She was the daughter of a Military officer.  She married Bolshevik founder Vladimir Lenin in 1898 .

== The Early Years ==

Nadya’s father, Konstantin Ignat’evich Krupsky, was orphaned in 1847 at nine years of age. He was educated and given a commission as an infantry officer in the Russian Army. Just before leaving for his assignment in Poland he married Krupskaya’s mother.  After six years of service, Krupsky lost favor with his supervisors and was charged with “un-Russian activities.” He may have been suspected of being involved with revolutionaries. Following this time he worked in factories or wherever he could find work until later in life when he was recommissioned just before his death.<ref>  McNeal, Bride of the Revolution, 5-9.</ref>  

Her mother, Elizaveta Vailevna Tristrova was the daughter of landless nobles. Elizaveta’s parents died when she was young and she was enrolled in The Pavlovskoy Institute, which happened to be the highest formal education available to women in Russia during this time. After earning her degree Elizaveta went on to work as a governess for noble families until she married Krupsky.<ref>McNeal, Bride of the Revolution, 11-12</ref>  

Having parents who were well educated combined with firsthand experience with lower class working conditions probably lead to the formation of many of Nadya’s ideologies. “From her very childhood Krupskaya was inspired with the spirit of protest against the ugly life around her.”<ref>C. Bobrovskaija, Lenin and Krupskaja (New York City : Workers Library Publishers, Inc. , 1940), 4.</ref>
 
One of Nadya’s friends from gymnasium, Ariadne Tyrkova, described Krupskaya as “a tall, shy, quiet girl, who did not flirt with the boys, moved and thought with deliberation, and had already formed strong convictions… She was one of those who are forever committed, once they have been possessed by their thoughts and feelings….”<ref>  McNeal, Bride of the Revolution, 19.</ref>  Nadya attempted to attend two different secondary schools before finding the perfect fit  with Prince A.A. Obolensky Female Gymnazium “a distinguished private girls’ secondary school in Petersburg.” This education was probably more liberal than most other gymnasiums since it was noted that some of the staff were former revolutionaries.<ref>McNeal, Bride of the Revolution, 17-19.</ref>  

After her father’s death Krupskaya and her mother gave lessons as a source of income. This probably didn’t bother Krupskaya  since she had expressed an interest in entering the education field from a young age. She was particularly drawn to Tolstoy’s theories on education, which was fluid instead of structured. They focused on the personal development of each individual student and centered on the importance of the teacher-student relationship.<ref>  Tolstoy, Leo. In Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved March  21,  2008, from Encyclopædia Britannica Online: http://search.eb.com/eb/article-13422</ref>  

This led Krupskaya to study many of Tolstoy’s works, including his theories of reformation. These were peaceful, and law abiding ideologies, which focused on people abstaining from unneeded luxuries and being self dependent instead of hiring someone else to tend your house, etc.  Tolstoy had a lasting impression on Krupskaya, since it was said she had “a special contempt for stylish cloths and comfort.”<ref>McNeal, Bride of the Revolution, 23.</ref>   She was always modest in dress as were her furnishings in her home and office.

== The Soviet Years ==

As a devoted, lifelong student, Krupskaya began to participate in several discussion circles. These groups got together to study and discuss particular topics for the benefit of everyone involved. It was later, in one of these circles that Krupskaya was first introduced to the theories of Marx. This piqued her interest as a potential way of making life better for her people. Krupskaya  began an in-depth study of the subject. This was difficult since such books had been banned by the Russian government. Consequently, revolutionaries had been collecting such books and keeping them in underground libraries.

It was at a similar discussion circle that Krupskaya first met Vladimir Ilyich Ulyanov, a devout Marxist who later came to be called Lenin. Krupskaya was impressed by his speeches, but not by his personality, at least not at first. Lenin was often described as flawless or even God-like by many of his later followers. It is hard to know very much of the courtship between Lenin and Krupskaya as neither party spoke often of personal matters.

In October 1896, several months after Lenin was arrested, Krupskaya was also arrested. After some time Lenin was sentenced to exile in Siberia. They had very little communication while in prison but before leaving for Siberia, Lenin wrote a “secret note” to Krupskaya which was delivered by her mother. It suggested that she could be permitted to join him in Siberia as his if she told people she was his fiancée.  At that time Krupskaya was still awaiting sentencing in Siberia. Krupskaya was permitted to accompany Lenin, but only under the stipulation that they were to be married as soon as she arrived.   Whether she married for love or for the cause is unknown.<ref>McNeal, Bride of the Revolution, 53-57.</ref> Upon his release Lenin went off to Europe where Krupskaya met up with him upon her release.

Krupskaya's political life was active: some would put her in the same category as Alexandra Kollontai. She was a functionary of the Bolshevik faction of the RSDLP from the early days. After the October Revolution, she was appointed deputy to Anatoliy Lunacharskiy, the People's Commissar for Education. She was also fundamental in the development of Soviet librarianship. Her relationship with Lenin was more professional than marital - which Kollantai compared to slavery - but she remained loyal, never once considering divorce.

Krupskaya is believed to have suffered from Graves' disease, an illness affecting the thyroid gland in the neck which causes the eyes to bulge and the neck to tighten. In female sufferers it can also disrupt the menstrual cycle, which may explain why Lenin and Krupskaya never had children (and the rumours about Lenin allegedly choosing to have an affair with Inessa Armand). As a result of her disease she was codenamed 'Fish' inside the Party, and Lenin allegedly used to call her "my little herring".

Although she was highly regarded within the party, Krupskaya was unable to prevent Joseph Stalin's consolidation of power after Lenin's death. She was then politically isolated by Stalin and his supporters. She had in fact been insulted by Stalin when he referred to her as a "syphilitic whore". The result of this eventually led to a permanent break in the already fragile relationship between Lenin and Stalin. She publicly disagreed with Stalin over the preservation and public display of her husband's body, which, it is rumoured, prompted Stalin to observe "Comrade Lenin may be in need of a new widow". However, unlike Stalin’s other rivals inside Russia, Krupskaya was not arrested during the Great Purge, and died of natural causes. According to some sources, she died after eating a birthday cake sent by Stalin.

Krupskaya is the author of the biography ''Reminiscences of Lenin'', which chronicles the life of her husband. However, the accuracy of this work has come into question due to her conspicuous omission of certain details about Lenin’s life: the book fails to mention the execution of Tsar Nicholas II of Russia and his family shortly after Lenin’s rise to power, and she omits any reference to the Red Terror. Her biography is the most detailed account of Lenin’s life before coming to power, but it ends in 1918, shortly after the Bolsheviks took power.

== Soviet Education and Libraries ==