thumbnail|150px|right|[[Yamada Tarō (山田太郎), tipikal ngaran Jepang(lalaki), sarua jeung ''John Smith'' dina Basa Inggris. ''Jane Smith'' bisa jadi Yamada Hanako (山田花子).]]

'''Ngaran Jepang''' modern (人名 ''jinmei'') ngabogaan ngaran kulawarga, atawa ''surname'', dituturkeun ku ngaran diri. Saperi di Cina, Kore, Vietnam jeung sababaraha wewengkon di Thailand sarta Indonesia, ieu dumasar kana sistim ngaran diri di Asia Wetan. 

Ngaran tengah teu dipake di Jepang, teu saperti dina ngaran urang kulon nu beda jeung ngaran diri.

Ngaran Jepang ilaharna ditulis dina kanji (karakter Han). ''Kanji'' keur hiji ngaran bisa ngabogaan kamanungkinan sababaraha cara maca.

Ngaran kulawarga nu ilahar di Suzuki (鈴木) (kadua ilahar), Katō (加藤) (nu kasupuluh) [http://www.japanese-name-translation.com/site/top500_Japanese_family_names.xls] (.XLS file). Kurang leuwih aya 100,000 ngaran kulawarga di Jepang. Ngaran kulawarga oge gumantung kana wewengkon, contona  ngaran Chinen (知念), Higa (比嘉), jeung Shimabukuro (島袋) ilahar di Okinawa tapi henteu wi wewengkon Jepang sejenna. Loba ngaran kulawarga Jepang nu asalna di kaayaan alam, contona, Ishikawa (石川) hartina "batu walungan", Yamamoto (山本) hartina "dasar gunung", jeung Inoue (井上) hartina "luhureun sumur".

Ngaran tengah leuwih loba variasi dina cara ngucapkeun jeung karakter nu dipake. Ngaran lalaki ilahar ditungtungan ku ''-rō'' (郎 "budak lalaki", tapi oge 朗 "jelas, caang") atawa ''-ta'' (太 "gede, dedeg"), atawa mibanda ''ichi'' (一 "mimiti [lalaki]"), ''kazu'' (oge ditulis ku 一 "mimiti [lalaki]", jeung sababaraha karakter sejenna), ''ji'' (二 "kadua [lalaki]" atawa 次 "saterusna"), atawa ''dai'' (大 "gede, agung") sedengan ngaran awewe nu ilahar make ahiran ''-ko'' (子 "budak") atawa ''-mi'' (美 "geulis"). (Mimiti taun, ngaran awewe ilahar make ahiran ''-ko'' mimiti ngurangan keur bayi sarta sababaraha diantarana miceun ''-ko'' sanggeus dewasa.) Ahiran sejen nu ilahar keur awewe nyaeta ''-ka'' (香 "seungit, parfum" or 花 / 華 "kembang") jeung ''-na'' (奈, atawa 菜, hejo).

== Struktur ==

Sacara stuktur, ngaran Jepang sederhana dibandingkeun jeung ngaran tina budaya sejen. Sakabeh masarakat Jepang ngabogaan ngaran kulawarga jeung ngaran diri, euweuh ngaran tengah, iwal ti kulawarga Kaisar nu anggota teu boga ngaran kulawarga. Ngaran diri dina Basa Jepang disebutna the "ngaran" (名前 ''namae'') atawa "ngaran handap" (下の名前 ''shita no namae''). Ngaran kulawarga disebut ''myōji'' (苗字 atawa 名字), "uji" (氏) atawa ''sei'' (姓).  Dina Basa Jepang, ngaran kulawarga memeh ngaran diri.

Aya sababaraha ngaran nu bisa jadi ngaran kulawarga atawa ngaran diri. (Contona Kaneko 金子, atawa Masuko 益子). Sanajan kitu, ilahar dina ngaran Jepang, nu ngaran kulawarga beda jeung ngaran diri, taya gantar pakair jeung nu dijentrekeun di dieu. Sanajan kitu moal matak ngabingungkeun, sabab ngaran kulawarga salawasna ditulis samemeh ngaran diri kaasup dina Basa Inggris.

== Karakter ==

Ngaran Jepang ilaharna ditulis dina kun'yomi (Basa Jepang asli), sabagean gede ngaran kulawarga jeung ngaran diri dina maca kanjina make on'yomi (dumasar kana Basa Cina).  Loba nu cara maca kanji ngan husus keur ngaran (Hon'inbō (本因坊, ngaran nu kawentar keur kulawarga pamaen go players), Shōji (東海林), Gushiken (具志堅), Sakonjū (左近充), jeung Kindaichi (金田一) contoh nu leuwih teu ilahar.  Aya oge nu ngaran kulawargana opat karakter kanji, saperti Mukainakano (向井中野), tapi ieu bener-bener jarang.

Ngaran awewe loba nu suku kata tungtungna ''ko'', ditulis make kanji nu hartina "budak" (子).  Hal ieu mimiti ilahar ti taun 1980-an, tur masih dipake nepi ka ayeuna.  Ngaran lalaki oge aya sababaraha nu maka ahiran suku kata ''ko'', tapi jarang make kanji 子 (leuiwh remen, lamun ngaran lalaki make ahiran ''ko'', tungtungna ''hiko'', make kanji 彦).  Ngaran tuntung ilahar keur lalaki -''shi'' jeung -''o''; ngaran tungtung -''shi'' ilaharna kecap gawe upamana, ''Atsushi'' nu hartina "bakal bajoang." Baheula (samemeh Perang Dunya II), ngaran awewe ilahar make katakana, tapi kaayaan ieu lila-lila leungit sorangan. Hiragana keur ngaran awewe teu ilahar dipake. Ngaran kana keur budak lalaki, sabagean ditulis make hiragana, sanajab ieu oge jarang dipake. Hal ini sabab skrip hiragana katembongna "feminin"; dina abad pertengahan Jepang, awewe ilaharna teu diajar kanji tur loba nulis make hiragana.

Ngaran, saperti kecap dina Basa Jepang, teu bisa dimimitian ku suku kata ''n'' (ん, ン). Sababaraha ngaran nu tungtungna ''n'': ngaran lalaki saperti Ken, Kon, Shin, Jun, jeung Den .

Babagean ngaran kulawarga bisa dibagi kana ngaran "''-tō''" . Kanji 藤, hartina ''Atō, Andō, Udō, Etō, Endō, Gotō, Katō, Kitō, Kudō, Kondō, Saitō, Satō, Shindō, Sudō, Naitō, Bitō, jeung Mutō. Sababaraha ngaran kulawarga nu ilahar aya dina runtuyan ieu.

===Hesena maca ngaran===

Hiji ngaran ditulis make kanji bisa ngabogaan leuwih ti hiji cara ngeja, tapi ngan hiji nu bener keur ngaran hiji jalma. Contona, ngaran kulawarga nu ditulis make kanji 中田 bisa dibaca boh ''Nakata'' atawa ''Nakada''. Sabalikna, hij ngaran bisa ditulis dina sababaraha bentuk kanji, tur ngan hiji ngaran nu bener keu hiji jalma. Karakter 一 nu dipake keur ngaran lalaki bisa dipake dina sababaraha bentuk tulisan saperti "Hajime," "Ichi," "Kazu," "Hitoshi," jeung sejenna. Ngaran "Hajime" bisa ditulis saperti kieu: 始, 治, 初, 一, 元, 肇, 創, 甫, 基, 哉, 啓, 春, 本, 源, 東, 大, 孟, atawa 祝. Hal ieu kacida lobana nu pakait antara ngaran jeung cara nulisna nu ilahar dipake keur ngaran lalaki tinimbang ngaran kulawarga atawa ngaran awewe, tapi sakabehna bisa ditempo dina kategori ieu. Ieu bisa nyieun gabungan, cara maca, jeung romanisasi ngaran Jepang jadi masalah nu rumit. Ku sabab kitu, dina kartu ngaran geus ilahar nuliskeun cara maca nu disebut furigana, tur dina pormulir jeung dokumen mere lolongkrang keur nulis cara maca ngaran dina ''kana'' (ilaharna katakana). Di rumah makan di Jepang, keur ngantri tempat diuk nu dituliskeun dina daptar nungguan, ilahar ditulis make katakana tinimbang kanji.

Sabagean leutik ngaran Jepang, bagean tina ngaran kulawarga, ngagunakeun karakter heubeul. Conto nu ilahar dipake nyaeta keur karakter ''shima'', pulo, bisana ditulis 嶋 keur gaganti nu ilahar 島. Sababaraha ngaran oge make kanji nu teu ilahar, atawa kanji nu geus teu dipake deui dina Basa Jepang modern. Urang Jepang nu make ngaran ieu teu hayang ngaganti ku karakter nu sarua atawa sederhana dina karakter Basa Jepang modern.

Hiji conto ngaran Saitō.  Aya leuwih ti 100 kanji nu bisa dibaca ''sai'' tur leuwih ti 200 kanji keur ''tō'', dina hal ieu, aya dua kanji ilahar keur ''sai''.  Dua karakter ''sai'' ieu ngabogaan harti nu beda: 斉 hartina "babarengan" atawa "paralel", tapi 斎 hartina "ngabersihan". Dua karakter nu ngabingungkeun ieu bisa nyababkeun kaeraan.

Ngaran kulawarga kadangkala ditulis make karakter "idiosyncratic", disebut ateji, nu pakait teu langsung jeung cara ngucapkeun ngaran. Contona, 四月一日 ilaharna dibaca ''shigatsu tsuitachi'' ("1 April"), tapi dina ngaran kulawarga dibaca ''watanuki'' ("pakean salapis"), sabab 1 April nyaeta tanggal tradisional keur ngarobah pakean ti usum tiris ka usum panas.

Salian ti hese ieu, aya cukup pola jeung ulangan ngaran keur urang Jepang asli nu bisa kapanggih keur ngaran kulawargana jeung ngaran diri.

=== Aturan ===

Ngaran make kanji di Jepang diatur ku aturan pamarentah ngeunaan aturan pamakean kanji.  Nu dipake ayeuna (Oktober 2004) 2.232 "kanji ngaran" (jinmeiyō kanji) dipake keur ngaran diri, sarta pamarentah ngarencanakeun keur naekeun ieu list ku nambahan 578 kanji di mangsa nu bakal datang. Ieu ngarupakeun tambahan panggedena saprak Perang Dunya II. Ngan kanji nu ditetepkeun sacara resmi nu dipake keur ngaran jalma. Hal ieu keur ngayakinkeun ngaran bisa ditulis tur dibaca dina leteratur Basa Jepang. Aturan oge ngatur ngaran nu teu ilahar dipake; contona dina taun 1993 aya nu ngusulkeun keur mere ngaran budakna Akuma (jurig) [http://www.nistep.go.jp/achiev/ftx/eng/pol001e/html/pol001ee.html nu dilarang keur dipake].

Pamarentah Jepang ngatur sacara teges jumlah kanji nu dipake keur ngaran nu barudak jumlahna 2,230, tapi loba karakter heubeul nu masih dipake dina ngaran kolot.  Sabab kategesan ini matak ngabingungkeun keur dipake dina ngaran kolot, loba nu ayeuna robah malah jadi nambahan tinimbang ngurangan jumlah kanji nu meunang dipake dina ngaran. Sanajan kitu, Pangadilan Luhur Saporo nangtukeun yen taya kakuatan pamarentah keur teu narima nu ngadaptarkeun ngaran budak sabab aya karakter kanji nu ilahar kapanggih tapi teu kaasup kana karakter ngaran resmi nu dikaluarkeun ku Departemen Kehakiman. Sejenn, pamarentah Jepang oge ngarencanakeun keur nambahan jumlah "nu diijinkeun" keur ngaran make kanji.  

Rencana keur nambahan jumlah kanji loba nu protes, sabab sabagean gede karakter Cina nu hartina "kanker", "wasir", "mayit" jeung "geugeuleuh", kaasup kana jukugo (kecap nu ngandung dua atawa leuwih kanji) hartina "sumpah", "palacuran", tur "perkosa", kaasup kana daptar tambahan. Hal ieu sabab taya ukuran keur nangtukeun kanji nu diusulkeun. Sanajan kitu, pamarentah bakal menta asupan ti masarakat samemeh nyatujuan kana daptar tambahan.

Loba urang Jepang jeung agen nu ngasupkeun adat istiadat keur nyatujuan isu ieu. Buku alamat, upamana, ilahar make karakter rubi keur ngajelaskeun cara maca ngaran. Kawarganagaraan Jepang diperlukeun keur make ngaran romaji dina sosialisasi make katakana keur ngahormatna.

Sakabeh kompilasi ieu oge kapanggih dina ngaran tempat di Jepang.

Teu sakabeh ngarah lengkep. Sababaraha ngan ilahar disimpulkeun ku frase ''tanakamura'' ("desa di tengah-tengah huma"): aya tilu kanji: 田 (''ta'', sawah), 中 (''naka'', tengah) tur 村 (''mura'', desa), babarengan dina unggal pasangan, nyieun bentuk sederhana, dipake keur ngaran kulawarga: Tanaka, Nakamura, Murata, Nakata, Muranaka, Tamura.

== Adat istiadat ==

Baheula, ngaran di Jepang dianggap milik Kaisar tur ngaran kulawarga ngagambarkeun aturan dina pamarentahan nu "dilayani". Contona Otomo. Ngaran oge bisa dibere salaku kahormatan jeung kontribusina. Sababaraha ngaran kulawarga asalan tina ngaran Cina jeung ngaran Korean. Contona Kaneshiro (金城) (Cina) jeung Ō (王) (Cina).

Salila Musashi bakal disebut "Ichirō ti Asahi-mura Musashi".  Pelayan dibere ngaran sanggeus tempat usahana (contona, Denbei, nu boga Sagamiya, bakal disebut Sagamiya Denbei), sarta patani ku make ngaran bapana (contona, Fujida, nu ngaran bapana Doiji, bakal disebut "Fujida putra  Doiji").  Sanggeus restorasi Meiji, pamarentah nitah keur sakabaeh wargana keur mere ngaran kulawarga salian ti ngaran diri: loba masarakat nu nyokot dumasar kana ngaran sajarah, sedengkeun nu sejenna dumasar kana sederhana jeung tempat kulawarga tumuwuh. Ieu nerangkeun, sabagean gede ngaran kulawarga di Jepang kacida loba bedana dina cara ngeja jeung ngucapkeun.

Salila periode kulawarga nu ngabogaan sababaraha budak, ilahar nyebut ngaranna dumasa kana nomer kalahiran ditungtungan ku ''rō'' (郎, "putra").  Budak mimiti disebut "Ichirō", kadua "Jirō", jeung saterusna. Budak awewe ilahar dingaranan ''ko'' (子, "putri") dina tungtung ngaran dirina; teu matak bingung ku ahiran nu kurang ilahar keur budak lalaki ''hiko'' (彦). Kaayaan ieu lila-lila beuki teu ilahar, sanajan masih keneh loba budak nu make ngaran ieu. 

===Nyebut ka jeung sejenna===

:''Artikel utama: Japanese titles''

Cara nyebut ngaran dina paguneman gumantung kana kaayaan jeung hubungan nu ngobrol jeung nu ngadengekeun jeung ngaran nu dibawa. Ilaharna nu dipake ngaran kulawarga, ngaran diri leuwih remen dipake dina kaayaan informal jeung nu ngobrol leuwih kolot, leuwih senior atawa geus wanoh kana ka nu diajak ngobrol. Lamun ngobrol kanu sejen, atawa ka di luar group, gelar tambahan saperti さん ''-san'' dipake.

Urang Jepang jarang nyebut ngaran kanu leuwih seniors atawa kasaluhureun, cukup ku make gelar: di lingkungan kulawarga saperti ''okaasan'' ("ema"), di sakola 先生 ''sensei'' ("guru"), sedengkeun di parusahaan 社長 ''shachō''.

===Ngaran panggilan===

Ilahar di Jepang nyieun singgetan ku nyokot dua morae mimiti tina kecap tur kadangkala dipake kana ngaran (ilahar keur selebriti). Contona, , ngaran aktor jeung penyangi Jepang, jadi . Kadangkala dipake oge keur salian ti selebriti Jepang: selebriti Jepang oge make ngaran kombinasi kanji jeung katakana, saperti Beat Takeshi (Takeshi Kitano), Marcy (Masashi Tashiro), Martin (Masayuki Suzuki).
<!--
Corresponding to any given name there are one or more hypocoristics, affectionate nicknames. These are formed by adding the suffix -chan ちゃん to a stem. There are two types of stem. One consists of the full given name. Examples of this type are ''Taroochan'' from ''Taroo'', ''Kimikochan'' from ''Kimiko'', and ''Yasunarichan'' from ''Yasunari''. The other type of stem is a modified stem derived from the full given name. Examples of such names are: ''Tarochan'' from ''Taroo'', ''Kiichan'' from ''Kimiko'', and ''Yaachan'' from ''Yasunari''. Hypochoristics with modified stems are more intimate than those based on the full given name.

Hypochoristics with modified stems are derived by adding -chan to a stem consisting of an integral number, usually one but occasionally two, of feet, where a foot consists of two moras. A mora 音節 is the unit of which a light syllable contains one and a heavy syllable two. For example, the stems that may be derived from ''Taroo'' are /taro/, consisting of two light syllables, and /taa/, consisting of a single syllable with a long vowel, resulting in ''Tarochan'' and ''Taachan''. The stems that may be derived from ''Hanako'' are /hana/, with two light syllables, /han/, with one syllable closed by a consonant, and /haa/, with one syllable with a long vowel, resulting in ''Hanachan'', ''Hanchan'', and ''Haachan''. The segmental content is usually a left substring of that of the given name. However, in some cases it is obtained by other means, including the use of another reading of the Chinese characters used to write the name. For example, a girl named ''Keiko'' may be called ''Meguchan'' because the character used to write the /kei/ of ''Keiko'', 恵 can also be read /megu/.

thumbnail|100px|right|[[Yamada Tarō (), a typical or stereotype Japanese name (male), equivalent to ''John Smith'' in English. ''Jane Smith'' would be Yamada Hanako ().]]
 in modern times usually consist of a Chinese, Korean and Vietnamese cultures. "Middle names" are not generally used.

Japanese names are usually written in ''kanji'', which are Chinese characters in Japanese pronunciation. The ''kanji'' for a name may have a variety of possible Japanese pronunciations, but usually parents might use hiragana or katakana when giving a birth name to their new-born child. Names written in hiragana or katakana don't really bear a meaning, in contrast to given names expressed in kanji.

Japanese family names are extremely varied: according to estimates, there are over 100,000 different surnames in use today in Japan. This is due to the recent origin of family names in Japan (1870s), hence there have been few generations in which family names could become extinct.<ref>This is in stark contrast to the small number of family names in nearby China and Korea, which have used family names for far longer; see Satō () (most common), Suzuki () (second most common), Katō () (tenth most common).<ref>[http://www.japanese-name-translation.com/site/top500_Japanese_family_names.xls] (.XLS file).
</ref>
Surnames occur with varying frequency in different regions; for example, the names Chinen (), Higa (), and Shimabukuro () are common in Okinawa but not in other parts of Japan. Many Japanese family names derive from features of the rural landscape; for example, Ishikawa () means "stone river," Yamamoto (山本) means "the base of the mountain," and Inoue () means "above the well."

Given names are much more diverse in pronunciation and character usage. Male names often end in ''-rō'' ( "son", but also  "clear, bright") or ''-ta'' ( "great, thick"), or contain ''ichi'' ( "first [son]"), ''kazu'' (also written with 一 "first [son]", along with several other possible characters), ''ji'' ( "second [son]" or  "next"), or ''dai'' ( "great, large") while female names often end in ''-ko'' ( "child") or ''-mi'' ( "beauty"). Other popular endings for female names include ''-ka'' ( "scent, perfume" or  "flower") and ''-na'' (, or , meaning greens).

==Structure==

All Japanese imperial family, whose members bear no surname. The surname is called ''myōji'' ( or ), ''uji'' () or ''sei'' (), and the given name is called the "name" ( ''namae'') or "lower name" ( ''shita no namae''). The family name precedes the given name.

Historically, ''myōji'', ''uji'' and ''sei'' had different meanings. ''Sei'' was originally the matrilineal surname.  Later it became granted only by the emperor.  There were relatively few ''sei'', and most of the medieval noble clans trace their lineage either directly to these ''sei'' or to the courtiers of these ''sei''.  ''Uji'' was first used to designate patrilineal descent, but later merged with ''myōji'' around the same time ''sei'' lost its matrilineal significance.  ''Myōji'' was, simply, what a family chooses to call itself, as opposed to the ''sei'' granted by the emperor.  While it was passed on patrilineally, one had a certain degree of freedom in changing one's ''myōji''. See also Kabane.

There are a few names that can be used as either surnames or given names (for example Mayumi , Kaneko , Masuko , or Arata ). In addition, to those familiar with Japanese names, which name is the surname and which is the given name is usually apparent, no matter which order the names are presented in. This thus makes it unlikely that the two names will be confused, for example when writing in English using the order family name, given name. However, when romanized, some common surnames and given names may coincide: e.g.,  (given name) and  (surname).

==Characters==
Japanese names are usually written in kun'yomi (native Japanese) kanji readings, a large number of given names and surnames use on'yomi (Chinese-based) kanji readings as well.  Many others use readings which are only used in names (nanori), such as the female name Nozomi (). The majority of surnames comprise one, two or three kanji characters. There are also a small number of four or five kanji surnames, such as Teshigawara () and Kutaragi (), Kadenokoji(), but these are extremely rare.

As mentioned above, female given names often end in the syllable ''ko'', written with the kanji meaning "child" (). This was much more common up to about the 1980s, but the practice does continue today.  Male names occasionally end with the syllable ''ko'', but very rarely using the kanji  (most often, if a male name ends in ''ko'', it ends in ''hiko'', using the kanji ).  Common male name endings are -''shi'' and -''o''; names ending with -''shi'' are often adjectives, e.g., ''Atsushi'' which might mean, for example, "(to be) faithful." In the past (before World War II), names written with katakana were common for women, but this trend seems to have lost favour. Hiragana names for women are not unusual. Kana names for boys, particularly those written in hiragana, have historically been very rare.  This may be in part because the hiragana script is seen as feminine; in medieval Japan, women generally were not taught kanji and wrote exclusively in hiragana.

Names, like other Japanese words, cannot begin with the syllable ''n'' (, ). Some names end in ''n'': the male names Ken, Shin, and Jun are examples.  The syllable ''n'' should not be confused with the consonant "n," which names ''can'' begin with; for example, the female name Naoko () or the male Naoya (). (The consonant "n" needs to be paired with a vowel to form a syllable.)

One large category of family names can be categorized as "''-tō''" names. The kanji , meaning ''Atō, Andō, Udō, Etō, Endō, Gotō, Katō, Kitō, Kudō, Kondō, Saitō, Satō, Shindō, Sudō, Naitō, Bitō, and Mutō. As already noted, some of the most common family names are in this list.

===Difficulty of reading names===
A name written in kanji may have more than one common pronunciation, only one of which is correct for a given individual. For example, the surname written in kanji as  may be read either ''Tōkairin'' or ''Shōji''. Conversely, any one name may have several possible written forms, and again, only one will be correct for a given individual. The character 一 when used as a male given name may be used as the written form for "Hajime," "Hitoshi," "Ichi- / -ichi" "Kazu- / -kazu," and many others. The name "Hajime"  may be written with any of the following: , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , or . This many-to-many correspondence between names and the ways they are written is much more common with male given names than with surnames or female given names, but can be observed in all these categories. This can make the collation, pronunciation, and romanization of a Japanese name a very difficult problem. For this reason, business cards often include the pronunciation of the name as furigana, and forms and documents always have spaces to write the reading of the name in kana (usually katakana). At restaurants in Japan it is common to wait to be seated by writing one's name on a list and waiting to be called, and at the top of the list there is usually a request to write one's name in katakana, rather than kanji.

A few Japanese names, particularly family names, include old-fashioned versions of characters. For example the very common character ''shima'', island, may be written as  or  instead of the usual . Some names also feature very uncommon kanji, or even kanji which no longer exist in modern Japanese.  Japanese people who have such names are likely to compromise by substituting similar or simplified  characters.

An example of such a name is Saitō.  There are two common kanji for ''sai'' here.  The two ''sai'' characters have different meanings:  means "together" or "parallel", but  means "to purify". These names can also exist written in old-fashioned characters, as 齊藤 and 齋藤 respectively.

Family names are sometimes written with idiosyncratic characters, called ateji, that relate indirectly to the name as spoken. For example,  would normally be read as ''shigatsu tsuitachi'' ("April 1st"), but as a family name it is read ''watanuki'' ("unpadded clothes"), because April 1st is the traditional date to switch from winter to summer clothes.

Most Japanese people and agencies have adopted customs to deal with these issues.  Address books, for instance, often contain furigana or ruby characters to clarify the pronunciation of the name.  Japanese nationals are also required to give a romanized name for their passport. The recent use of Japanese media using katakana when referring to Japanese celebrities who have gained international fame has started a fad among young socialites attempting to invoke a cosmopolitan flair who use katakana names as a badge of honor. All of these complications are also found in Japanese place names.

Not all names are complicated. Some common names are summarized by the phrase ''tanakamura'' ("the village in the middle of the rice fields"): the three kanji:  (''ta'', rice field),  (''naka'', middle) and  (''mura'', village), together in any pair, form a simple, reasonably common surname: Tamura.

Despite these difficulties, there are enough patterns and recurring names that most native Japanese will be able to read virtually all family names they encounter and the majority of personal names.

=== Regulations ===
Kanji names in Japan are governed by the government's rules on kanji use. As of October 2004 there are 2,232 "name kanji" (the jinmeiyō kanji) and "commonly used characters" (the jōyō kanji) used in personal names, and the government plans to increase this list by 578 kanji in the near future. This would be the largest increase since World War II. Only kanji which appear on the official list may be used in given names. This is to ensure that names can be written and read by those literate in Japanese. Rules also govern names considered to be inappropriate; for example, in 1993 two parents who tried to name their child Akuma, which literally means "devil," were prohibited from doing so.<ref>[http://www.nistep.go.jp/achiev/ftx/eng/pol001e/html/pol001ee.html Legal Regulations on the Advanced Science and Technology 15<!-- Bot generated title -->]</ref>

Though there are regulations on the naming of children, many old characters can still be found in adults' names. Because these restrictions have been confusing to say the least, many recent changes have been made to increase rather than to reduce the number of kanji allowed for use in names. Moreover, the Sapporo High Court held that it was unlawful for the government to deny registration of a child's name because it contained a kanji character that was relatively common but not included in the official list of name characters compiled by the Ministry of Justice. Subsequently, the Japanese government promulgated plans to increase the number of "permitted" kanji.  

The use of a space in given names (to separate first and middle names) is not allowed, because technically, a space is not an allowed character.

The plan to increase the number of name kanji has been controversial, largely because Chinese characters meaning "cancer" (), "hemorrhoids" (), "corpse" () and "excrement" (), as well as those used in jukugo (words which are compounds of two or more kanji) meaning "curse" (), "prostitute" () and "rape" (), are among the proposed additions to the list. This is because no measures were taken to determine the appropriateness of the kanji proposed. The government will seek input from the public before approving the list.

== Customs ==
In ancient times, people in Japan were considered the property of the Emperor and their surname reflected the role in the government they served. An example is Ōtomo (おおとも 'great attendant, companion'). Names would also be given in the recognition of a great achievement and contribution.

Until the Musashi would say "Ichirō from Asahi-mura of Musashi".  Merchants were named after their brands (for example, Denbei, the owner of Sagamiya, would be Sagamiya Denbei), and farmers were named after their fathers (for example, Isuke, whose father was Genbei, would be "Isuke, son of Genbei").  After the Meiji restoration, the government ordered all commoners to assume surnames in addition to their given names: many people adopted historical names, while others simply made names up or had a local sage make up a surname.  This explains, in part, the large number of surnames in Japan, as well as their great diversity of spellings and pronunciations.

During the period when typical parents had several children, it was a common practice to name sons by numbers suffixed with ''rō'' (, "son").  The first son would be known as "Ichirō", the second as "Jirō", and so on. Girls were often named with ''ko'' (, "child") at the end of the given name; this should not be confused with the less common male suffix ''hiko'' (). Both practices have become less common, although many children still have names along these lines. 

===Speaking to and of others===

The way in which a name is used in conversation depends on the circumstances and the speaker's relationships with the listener and the bearer of the name.  Typically the family name is used, with given names largely restricted to informal situations and cases where the speaker is older than, superior to, or very familiar with the named individual.  When addressing someone, or referring to a member of one's out-group, a title such as  ''-san'' is typically added.

Japanese people avoid often referring to their seniors or superiors by name at all, using just a title: within a family this might be a kinship relation such as  ''okāsan'' ("mother"), in a school it could be  ''sensei'' ("teacher"), while a company president would be addressed as  ''shachō'' ("company president").

On the other hand, pronominals meaning "you" (  ''anata'',  ''kimi'',  ''omae'' ) are used rather little in Japanese. Using such words sometimes sounds disrespectful, and people will commonly address each other by name, title and honorific even in face-to-face conversations.

Calling someone's name without any title or honorific is called ''yobisute'' (呼び捨て), and may be considered rude even in the most informal and friendly occasions.  This faux pas, however, is readily excused for foreigners.

===Nicknames===

The common Japanese practice of forming abbreviations by concatenating the first two morae of two words  is sometimes applied to names (usually those of celebrities). For example, , a famous Japanese actor and singer, becomes . This is sometimes applied even to non-Japanese celebrities: Japanese celebrities have also taken names combining kanji and katakana, such as テリー伊藤).

Corresponding to any given name there are one or more hypocoristics, affectionate nicknames. These are formed by adding the suffix -chan ちゃん to a stem. There are two types of stem. One consists of the full given name. Examples of this type are ''Tarō-chan'' from ''Tarō'', ''Kimiko-chan'' from ''Kimiko'', and ''Yasunari-chan'' from ''Yasunari''. The other type of stem is a modified stem derived from the full given name. Examples of such names are: ''Taro-chan'' from ''Tarō'', ''Kii-chan'' from ''Kimiko'', and ''Yā-chan'' from ''Yasunari''. Hypochoristics with modified stems are more intimate than those based on the full given name.

Hypocoristics with modified stems are derived by adding -chan to a stem consisting of an integral number, usually one but occasionally two, of feet, where a foot consists of two moras. A mora  is the unit of which a light syllable contains one and a heavy syllable two. For example, the stems that may be derived from ''Tarō'' are /taro/, consisting of two light syllables, and /taa/, consisting of a single syllable with a long vowel, resulting in ''Taro-chan'' and ''Tā-chan''. The stems that may be derived from ''Hanako'' are /hana/, with two light syllables, /han/, with one syllable closed by a consonant, and /haa/, with one syllable with a long vowel, resulting in ''Hanachan'', ''Hanchan'', and ''Hāchan''. The segmental content is usually a left substring of that of the given name. However, in some cases it is obtained by other means, including the use of another reading of the Chinese characters used to write the name. For example, a girl named ''Keiko'' may be called ''Meguchan'' because the character used to write the /kei/ of ''Keiko'', , can also be read /megu/.