The '''universal priesthood''' or the '''priesthood of all believers''', as it would come to be known in the present day, is a Christian doctrine believed to be derived from several passages of the New Testament. It is a foundational concept of Protestantism.<ref>"Protestantism originated in the 16th-century Reformation, and its basic doctrines, in addition to those of the ancient Christian creeds, are justification by grace alone through faith, the priesthood of all believers, and the supremacy of Holy Scripture in matters of faith and order" ("The Protestant Heritage." Encyclopædia Britannica. 2007. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. 20 Sept. 2007[http://www.britannica.com/eb/article-9109446]</ref> It is this doctrine that Martin Luther adduces in his 1520 ''To the Christian Nobility of the German Nation'' in order to dismiss the medieval Christian belief that Christians were to be divided into two classes: "spiritual" and "temporal" or non-spiritual. He put forward the doctrine that all baptized Christians are "priests" and "spiritual" in the sight of God:
<blockquote>That the pope or bishop anoints, makes tonsures, ordains, consecrates, or dresses differently from the laity, may make a hypocrite or an idolatrous oil-painted icon, but it in no way makes a Christian or spiritual human being. In fact, we are all consecrated priests through Baptism, as St. Peter in 1 Peter 2[:9] says, "You are a royal priesthood and a priestly kingdom," and Revelation [5:10], "Through your blood you have made us into priests and kings."<ref>Martin Luther, ''Weimar Ausgabe'', vol. 6, p. 407, lines 19-25 as quoted in Timothy Wengert, "The Priesthood of All Believers and Other Pious Myths," page 12[http://www.valpo.edu/ils/documents/05_wengert.pdf].</ref></blockquote>

Two months later Luther would write in his ''Babylonian Captivity of the Church'' (1520):
<blockquote>How then if they are forced to admit that we are all equally priests, as many of us as are baptized, and by this way we truly are; while to them is committed only the Ministry (''ministerium Predigtamt'') and consented to by us (''nostro consensu'')? If they recognize this they would know that they have no right to exercise power over us (''ius imperii'', in what has not been committed to them) except insofar as we may have granted it to them, for thus it says in 1 Peter 2, "You are a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a priestly kingdom." In this way we are all priests, as many of us as are Christians. There are indeed priests whom we call ministers. They are chosen from among us, and who do everything in our name. That is a priesthood which is nothing else than the Ministry. Thus 1 Corinthians 4:1: "No one should regard us as anything else than ministers of Christ and dispensers of the mysteries of God."<ref>''De captivitate Babylonica ecclesiae praeludium'' [''Prelude concerning the Babylonian Captivity of the church''], ''Weimar Ausgabe'' 6, 564.6-14 as quoted in Norman Nagel, "Luther and the Priesthood of All Believers," ''Concordia Theological Quarterly'' 61 (October 1997) 4:283-84.</ref></blockquote>
The Bible passage considered to be the basis of this belief is the First Epistle of Peter, 2:9:

:But you are not like that, for you are a chosen people. You are royal priests, a holy nation, God’s very own possession. As a result, you can show others the goodness of God, for he called you out of the darkness into his wonderful light.

(This NLT version reflects the Protestant view, as the universal "royal priesthood" from the Bible Luther cites above has been changed to individual "royal priests".)

Other relevant Scripture passages include Exodus 19:5-6, First Peter 2:4-8, Revelation 1:4-6, 5:6-10, and many passages in the Epistle to the Hebrews.  

==Overview==
In ancient Israel, priests acted as mediators between God and people.  They ministered according to God's instruction and they offered sacrifices to God on behalf of the people.  Once a year, the high priest would enter the holiest part of the temple and offer a sacrifice for the sins of all the people, including all the priests.

Although many religions use priests, most Protestant faiths reject the idea of a priesthood as a group that is spiritually distinct from lay people. They typically employ professional clergy who perform many of the same functions as priests such as clarifying doctrine, administering communion, performing baptisms, marriages, etc. In many instances, Protestants see professional clergy as servants acting on behalf of the local believers. This is in contrast to the priest, whom some Protestants see as having a distinct authority and spiritual role different from that of ordinary believers.

Most Protestants today recognize only one mediator between them and God the Father, and that is God the Son, Jesus Christ (1 Timothy 2:5).  The Epistle to the Hebrews calls Jesus the supreme "high priest," who offered himself as a perfect sacrifice (Hebrews 7:23-28).  Protestants believe that through Christ they have been given direct access to God, just like a priest; thus the doctrine is called the '''priesthood of all believers'''.  God is equally accessible to all the faithful, and every Christian has equal potential to minister for God. This doctrine stands in opposition to the concept of a spiritual aristocracy or hierarchy within Christianity.

The belief in the priesthood of all believers does not preclude order, authority or discipline within congregations or denominational organizations. For example, ministry" established by God in the Christian Church. The Augsburg Confession states:
<blockquote>[From Article 4:] Furthermore, it is taught that we cannot obtain forgiveness of sin and righteousness before God through our merit, work, or satisfactions, but that we receive forgiveness of sin and become righteous before God out of grace for Christ’s sake through faith when we believe that Christ has suffered for us and that for his sake our sin is forgiven and righteousness and eternal life are given to us ... [From Article 5:] To obtain such faith God instituted the office of preaching, giving the gospel and the sacraments. Through these, as through means, he gives the Holy Spirit who produces faith, where and when he wills, in those who hear the gospel ... [Article 14:] Concerning church government it is taught that no one should publicly teach, preach, or administer the sacraments without a proper [public] call.<ref>Articles 4, 5, and 14 of the Augsburg Confession in Robert Kolb and Timothy J. Wengert, trans. and eds., ''The Book of Concord : The Confessions of the Evangelical Lutheran Church'', (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2000), 39, 40, 46.</ref></blockquote>

==History==
The origins of the doctrine within Protestantism are somewhat obscure.  The idea was found in a radical form in Lollard thought. Martin Luther adduced it in his writings for the purpose of reforming the Christian Church, and it became a central tenet of Protestantism. 

The doctrine is strongly asserted within denomination. congregational polity, also lean heavily on this concept.

'''만인제사장설'''(萬人祭司長說)은 개신교 교리 중 하나로서, 신자는 누구나 하나님께 직접 예배하고 교통할 수 있다는 요지를 담고 있다. 이는 신자들을 가르치는 교회(Ecclesia Docens)와 듣는 교회(Ecclesia Discens)로 나누는 로마 가톨릭의 교리와 차별되는 것이다. 만인제사장설은 종교개혁 당시 개혁자들이 특히 강하게 주장하였다.

만인제사장설의 근거로 자주 사용되는 성경 구절은 베드로전서 2장 9절이다: 

==만인제사장설 교리==
만인제사장설 교리는 '기독교인 그가 성직자이든 아니든 상관 없이 누구나 직접, 오로지 개신교 신자에게 있어, 모든 그리스도인이 하나님 앞의 제사장이므로, 영적으로 서열이나 독재가 존재하지 않으며, 또한 다른 그리스도인에게 경배받을 이유도 존재하지 않다는 것을 의미한다. 

즉, 갈라디아서 3장 28절 (너희는 유대인이나 헬라인이나 종이나 자유인이나 남자나 여자나 다 그리스도 예수 안에서 하나이니라 (개역개정판))에 따라, 모든 그리스도인은 동등한 권리를 가지고 있는 것이며, 단지 직분에 따라 그 역할의 차이가 있을 뿐이다.

개신교에서는 이 교리를 받아들여 (성공회를 제외하고는) 신품성사, 고해성사 등의 기존 7성사를 간소화 하였다. 또 개신교 교파에 따라서는 (루터교, 선교단체 등) 실제로 성직자가 아닌 교인들이 설교를 하기도 한다.