'''Evagrius Ponticus''', or '''Evagrius the Solitary''' (345-399 A.D.) was a Christian monk and ascetic. One of the rising stars in the late fourth century church, he was well-known as a keen thinker, a polished speaker, and a gifted writer. Throughout his ministry, he was a trusted friend to several influential contemporary church leaders, including Basil of Caesarea, Gregory of Nazianzus, Gregory of Nyssa, Nectarius of Constantinople, Macarius of Egypt, and Theophilus of Alexandria. 

frame|right|Evagrius Ponticus (left), John of Sinai, and someone else identity unknown. 17th century.

==Life==
He was born into a Christian family in the small town of Ibora, in the Roman province of Second Ecumenical Council in 381 A.D., Evagrius stood with Gregory and played an important role in the successful battle against Arianism.

Constantinople offered many worldly attractions, and his vanity was aroused by the high praise of his peers while gluttony, greed and sloth became persistent temptations over which he despaired of ever becoming victorious. Eventually, he became infatuated with a married woman. Yet before he acted upon his unruly emotions, he had - reportedly - a vision in which he was imprisoned by the soldiers of the governor at the request of the woman's husband. This vision made him flee from the capital and head for Jerusalem.<ref>Evagrius. ''Evagrius of Pontus: The Greek Ascetic Corpus.'' Translated by Robert E. Sinkewicz. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press 2003, p. xvii.</ref>

For a short time, he stayed with coenobitic community of monks in Nitria but after some years moved to Macarios the Great and Macarius of Alexandria.<ref>''Ibid.'' p. xviii.</ref>

==Teachings==
Most Egyptian monks of that time were illiterate. Evagrius, a highly educated classical scholar, is believed to be one of the first people to begin recording and systematizing the erstwhile oral teachings of the monastic authorities known as the ''Desert Fathers''. Eventually, he also became regarded as a Desert Father, and several of his apothegms appear in the 'Vitae Patrum' (a collection of sayings from early Christian monks).

Evagrius rigorously tried to avoid teaching beyond the spiritual maturity of his audiences. When addressing novices, he carefully stuck to concrete, practical issues (which he called ''praktike''). His more advanced students enjoyed more theoretical, contemplative material (''gnostike'').

===The ''logismoi''===
The most prominent feature of his research was a system of categorizing various forms of temptation. He developed a comprehensive list of eight evil thoughts (λογισμοι) from which all sinful behavior springs. This list was intended to serve a diagnostic purpose: to help readers identify the process of temptation, their own strengths and weaknesses, and the remedies available for overcoming temptation.

The eight patterns of evil thought are vainglory, and pride. While he did not create the list from scratch, he certainly refined it. Some years later, Pope Gregory I would revise this list to form the more common Seven Deadly Sins.

'''Euagrios Pontikos''', latinisiert ''Evagrius Ponticus'', (* 345 in Ibora, Pontus; † 399 in Ägypten) war ein christlicher Mönch, Asket und Schriftsteller.

Euagrios, Schüler des Mönchen in der nitrischen Wüste. Zum Konzil von Konstantinopel (553). Er spielte beim Ausbruch der origenistischen Streitigkeiten am Ende des 4.&nbsp;Jahrhunderts unter den Mönchen in der ägyptischen Wüste eine große Rolle als Führer der gebildeten origenistischen Mönche, die von Bischof Theophilos von Alexandria (Amtszeit 385–412) nach dem Tod des Euagrios ausgewiesen wurden und bei Johannes Chrysostomos (um 345–407) in Konstantinopel Aufnahme fanden.

Euagrios ist der Begründer der Achtlasterlehre (siehe epigraphischer Form, etwa bei Neilos von Ankyra überliefert. Bei den Schriften handelt es sich um an der alexandrinischen Exegese ausgerichtete Bibelkommentare und asketische Schriften. Da viele seiner Werke schon früh in andere Sprachen des christlichen Orients übersetzt wurden, wurde Euagrios zum Vermittler monastischer Spiritualität im Orient und Okzident.

== Literatur ==

* David Brakke: ''Making Public the Monastic Life: Reading the Self in Evagrius Ponticus’ Talking Back.'' In: David Brakke, Michael L. Satlow, Steven Weitzman (Hrsg.): ''Religion and the Self in Antiquity.'' Indiana University Press, Bloomington und Indianapolis 2005, ISBN 0-253-21796-2, S. 222–233.
* Augustine Casiday (Hrsg.): ''Evagrius Ponticus.'' Routledge, Abingdon 2006, ISBN 0-415-32446-7.
* 