'''Ernest of Bavaria''' (Münster, Hildesheim, Freising and Liège. 

==Biography==
Ernest was born in Munich, the son of Albert V, Duke of Bavaria and Anna of Austria (1528-1590). 
thumb|Ernest of Bavaria
Duke Albert had destined his third son, Ernest, for the clerical vocation. He was educated and trained by the canon at Salzburg, and soon afterward at Cologne, Treves, and Würzburg as well; in the autumn of 1565, at the age of twelve, he likewise was elected bishop of Freising. Albert's wishes no doubt centered upon the neighboring archdiocese of Salzburg; but in 1569, when Elector Salentin VII of Isenburg-Grenzau incurred difficulties with the curia for non-recognition of the Council of Trent and was contemplating resignation, Ernest was proposed by his father, who had the support of the Spanish government at Brussels, as Salentin's successor. At the imperial diet of Speyer, in 1570, the negotiations with Salentin were so far advanced that Ernest went to Cologne in November, and served his first residence there as canon till May, 1571, such being the preliminary condition in the line of election. 

Salentin's resignation, however, was deferred, and in Hildesheim. In Münster for Ernest, efforts looking to Cologne were resumed and prosecuted more zealously than before. Moreover, the support of the curia now heightened the hope of some practical result. Duke Ernest, who for a time, in 1572, had well-nigh thwarted all his father's plans by a suddenly outcropping disinclination to ward the spiritual vocation, was sent to Rome in the spring of 1574, for a sojourn of nearly two years, by way of reward for submitting to his father's will. At Rome he won the particular good-will of the pope, so that Gregory XIII resolved to support, with all his might, Ernest's installation as coadjutor to Salentin; in fact, the advancement of Bavarian family interests appeared to be the only possible way of recovering a more secure standing for the Roman Catholic Church in Lower Germany. The status which had been gained by the election of Ernest to Hildesheim could not as yet, by itself alone, afford a very trustworthy base of support.

But against the common plans of Salentin, the curia, and the Bavarian court, opposition manifested itself on the side of the chapter at Cologne; when, in 1577, Salentin resigned, Ernest was defeated at the new election by twelve votes to ten by Gebhard Truchsess von Waldburg, who was elected by the Protestants and the lukewarm Catholics of the chapter. Duke Albert, as well as the papal nuncio Portia, protested against the election; but as both the emperor and the electors espoused Gehbard's cause, and as he passed for a good Catholic, receiving priestly consecration in March, 1578, and swearing to the Council of Trent, the curia disregarded the Bavarian protest and in March, 1580, confirmed the election.

In 1581 Ernest was elected the Spanish and Bavarian troops he quickly drove Gebhard into Werl in the Cologne War. In 1584 he was elected the Bishop of Münster, and also in that year the Papacy nuntiator was published. The Archbishopric of Cologne was important because it was one of the seven Imperial Electors of Holy Roman Empire, and as three of them were already Protestant, if Cologne was ruled by a Protestant a Protestant Emperor could be elected.

left|200px|thumb|Ernesto di Baviera
{{Bio
|Nome = Ernesto di Baviera 
|Cognome = 
|Sesso = M
|LuogoNascita = Monaco di Baviera
|GiornoMeseNascita = 17 dicembre
|AnnoNascita = 1554
|LuogoMorte = Arnsberg
|GiornoMeseMorte = 17 febbraio
|AnnoMorte = 1612
|Attività = arcivescovo cattolico
|Nazionalità = tedesco
|FineIncipit = fu Colonia, in Germania, dal 1583 al 1612
}}
Era inoltre principe-vescovo di Münster, Hildesheim, Frisinga e Liegi.

==Biografia==
Discendente della casa di Anna d'Asburgo. Era stato destinato fin dall'infanzia dal padre alla carriera ecclesiastica, e venne educato dai padri gesuiti.

Nel Colonia, Salisburgo: ma, nel dieta imperiale di Spira, nel 1570, i negoziati con Salentino sembravano essere in una fase avanzata, tanto che Ernesto si recò a Colonia in novembre, servendo come canonico fino al maggio 1571, incarico immediatamente precedente a quello di vescovo. 

Le dimissioni di Salentino, tuttavia, non arrivarono, e nel 1573, anzi, egli accettò i decreti tridentini, venendo quindi riconfermato come arcivescovo. In quell'anno invece Ernesto, allora diciannovenne, venne eletto vescovo del piccolo principato ecclesiastico di Hildesheim.

Nel cattolica, era un mezzo indispensabile per assicurare una più solida posizione alla Chiesa nella Germania meridionale.

thumb|left|Gebhard von Waldburg
Inaspettatamente, però, l'opposizione ai piani di Salentino, della curia e della corte bavarese venne dal capitolo della nunzio papale Bartolomeo Portia protestarono contro l'elezione, ma, poiché sia l'imperatore Rodolfo II sia gli elettori si schierarono dalla parte di Gebhard, il quale passava per un buon cattolico, avendo ricevuto la consacrazione a prete nel marzo 1578 e avendo giurato sui decreti del Concilio di Trento, la curia romana abbandonò la corte bavarese e finì per confermare l'elezione nel marzo 1580.

Nel frattempo, nel 1581 Ernesto venne eletto vescovo di Liegi. Quando però l'arcivescovo Gebhard von Waldburg si convertì al protestantesimo nel 1583, Ernesto venne finalmente eletto arcivescovo di Colonia il 22 maggio 1583. Con l'aiuto delle truppe spagnole e bavaresi, riuscì rapidamente a sconfiggere Gebhard nella Guerra di Colonia.

Nel principi elettori del elettore Palatino, il duca di Sassonia e il margravio di Brandeburgo, erano protestanti, se anche Colonia fosse stata occupata da essi, sarebbe stata possibile l'elezione di un imperatore luterano.