'''Li Ruihuan''' (en chinois traditionnel : 李瑞環 ; en chinois simplifié : 李瑞环) est un homme politique chinois né en septembre 1934. Li a été membre du comité directeur du ''Politburo'' du 15 comité central du parti communiste chinois (PCC) entre 1989 et 2002 et président du comité national de la conférence consultative politique du peuple chinois (CCPPC) entre 1993 et 2003.

Li est né dans une famille de paysans de la région de Baodi, près de Tianjin. Formé comme charpentier, Li travaille comme ouvrier sur les chantiers de Pékin entre 1951 et 1965. À partir de 1958, Li suit des cours du soir à l'institut de formation des ingénieurs-architectes et en sort diplômé en 1963. Li est l'inventeur d'une règle de calcul simplifié utilisée en charpenterie et à ce titre est comparé à un « jeune Lu Ban », un des maîtres charpentiers de la Chine ancienne.

Li est élu maire de Tianjin et se préoccupe d'améliorer les habitations ainsi que le réseau de transport. Il devient populaire parmi les habitans de Tianjin, à la fois par ses réalisations et par ses émissions à la radio et à la télévision dans lesquelles il répond aux problèmes de ces concitoyens.

En 1989, Li est élu au comité directeur du ''politburo'' du comité central du PCC.

En mars 1993, Li est élu à la présidence du comité national de la CCPPC (8 CCPPC), puis réelu en mars 1998 (9 CCPPC). 

'''Lǐ Ruìhuán''' (, September Standing Committee of the Political Bureau of 15th Central Committee of the Communist Party of China until November 2002. He served as Chairman of the 9th National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) until March 2003.

==Biography==
A native of Baodi County, Tianjin, and originally a carpenter, he was elected and reelected chairman of the 8th and 9th CPPCC National Committees in March 1993 and March 1998. Li Ruihuan is the sixth chairman of the CPPCC after Mao Zedong, Zhou Enlai, Deng Xiaoping, Deng Yingchao, and Li Xiannian. Since this post has been held by some of the most prominent revolutionary elders, it is spoken of "noble and sacred" by reverent observers. The principal duties of the CPPCC chief are mainly advisory and conciliatory; Li's duties focused on mitigating conflict between different sectors of society, conferring on state affairs, and providing ideas for the top bodies of PRC central government for reference. 

Li, born into ordinary peasant family on September, 1934; worked as construction worker in Beijing Third Construction Company, 1951-1965; attended spare-time architecture engineering institute, 1958-1963; and received college certificate. 

Inventor of the "simplified calculation method," which updated the traditional "lofting method" in carpentry, Li was known as "young Lu Ban," a legendary master carpenter in ancient China. He rose up the ranks of the construction industry and Tianjin politics.

During his tenure of office as Tianjin mayor, he actively supported institutional restructuring, focusing attention on improving urban housing and public transport conditions. He gained great popularity among Tianjin residents with his call-in radio and television programs through which he directly answered residents' inquires in concrete terms.

From 1989 on, he has been Standing Committee member of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee. Observers speculated that the former carpenter who worked on the Great Hall of the People would play a key role in the question of leadership succession at the 16th party congress as CPPCC chief, if not also the future direction of political reform.

Although the former Tianjin mayor has the same seniority as President Jiang Zemin, he has been relegated to the sidelines by Jiang since 1989. By 2002 there were reports from Beijing that Li had informed the Communist Party of China (CPC) headquarters three times of his desire to retire at the 2002 16th party congress. 

These reports struck many as unusual, given that Li, then 68, will be two years shy of 70 - the supposed retirement age for Politburo members - at the 16th congress, which endorsed a new CPC leadership. While sixty-eight would be considered retirement age most elsewhere, this is not an advanced age whatsoever for a top CPC cadre; in fact, at 68 Li was the second youngest member of the then seven-member Politburo Standing Committee, behind only Hu Jintao. Thus, many Li supporters assumed that he and Vice President Hu would have been the only two PSC incumbents to have their five-year terms renewed at the 16th congress. Thus, he would have been in place likely to assume the post of chairman of the National People's Congress (NPC), a post held by Li Peng prior to the party congress.