'''Альфред Уильям Нокс''' (Alfred William Knox, гражданской войны в России

==Биография==
Окончил Королевский военный колледж (1891), штабной колледж (1905), после чего служил в Генштабе и военном министерстве. В 1911—1918 был британским военным атташе в России. Во время 1-й мировой войны 1914—1918 находился в русской действующей армии. 

В 1918—1920 глава британской военной миссии в Сибири. В ноябре 1918 — один из организаторов установления диктатуры адмирала А. В. Колчака, ведал поступающим из Великобритании снабжением для колчаковской армии, создал школу с британскими инструкторами для подготовки офицерского состава и т.д.

Major-General '''Sir Alfred William Fortescue Knox''' (Conservative Party politician.

Born in Ulster, he joined the British Army and was posted to India.

In 1911 General Knox was appointed the British Military Attaché in Russian, he became a liaison officer to the Russian Army during First World War. During October Revolution in Russia Alfred Knox observed the Bolsheviks taking the Winter Palace on October 25 (November 7), 1917:
:''"The garrison of the Winter Palace originally consisted of about 2,000 all told, including detachments from yunker and ensign schools, three squadrons of Cossacks, a company of volunteers and a company from the Women's Battalion.''

:''The garrison had dwindled owing to desertions, for there were no provisions and it had been practically starved for two days. There was no strong man to take command and to enforce discipline. No one had any stomach for fighting; and some of the ensigns even borrowed great coats of soldier pattern from the women to enable them to escape unobserved.''

:''The greater part of the yunkers of the Mikhail Artillery School returned to their school, taking with them four out of their six guns. Then the Cossacks left, declaring themselves opposed to bloodshed! At 10 p.m. a large part of the ensigns left, leaving few defenders except the ensigns of the Engineering School and the company of women."'' [http://www.spartacus.schoolnet.co.uk/RUSknox.htm]