'''Cordell Jackson''' was an American guitarist thought to be the first woman to produce, engineer, arrange and promote music on her own rock and roll music label. She was born in Pontotoc, Mississippi, on July 15, 1923, and died in Memphis, Tennessee, on October 14, 2004. 

Jackson founded the Moon Records label in Memphis in 1956 after a few years of recording demos at Sam Phillips' Memphis Recording Service and Sun Records Studio. Unable to break into the Sun Records label's stable of male artists, she received the advice and assistance of RCA Records' Chet Atkins in forming this new label to release her music. She began releasing and promoting on the label singles she recorded in her home studio, serving as engineer, producer and arranger. The artists recorded included her and a small family of early rock and roll, rockabilly, and country music performers she recruited from several Southern states. 

Tav Falco's Panther Burns and Alex Chilton helped create new interest in her career in the 1980s when they began covering some of her Moon label's old singles such as "Dateless Night", a song she originally wrote in the 1950s for Florida artist Allen Page. Jackson then began playing occasional shows in the 1980s with her signature red Hagstrom electric guitar as a solo artist in Memphis, Hoboken, New York, and Chicago nightclubs. She recorded new material on her label with Memphis musicians Colonel Robert Morris and Bob Holden, becoming known as a "rock-and-roll granny" solo guitar instrumentalist. She appeared in 1991 and 1992 on national talk shows like ''Late Night With David Letterman'' and in a television commercial duelling with rockabilly artist Brian Setzer on guitar.

In the late 1990s, Cordell co-wrote and played with the Rockabilly icon, Colonel Robert Morris in Memphis. Colonel Robert also helped edit the book based on her life and career.

Her Moon Records label was the oldest continuously operating label in Memphis at the time of her death in 2004. ''The 50's Rock on the Moon of Memphis, Tennessee + an Oddity'', a compilaton album of the label's 1950s singles, was released on vinyl in the early 1980s and was later sold on compact disc until her death in 2004. The original 1950s vinyl singles compiled on that album have been displayed at the Rock and Roll Hall Of Fame and Museum in Cleveland, Ohio. She also released video singles through her label in the 1990s, including "Football Widow" and filmmaker Dan Rose's production of "The Split." Her marketing of her own video singles, as opposed to marketing them in multiple-song video collections, is reputed to be another first in her innovative lifetime of doing things her own way, bucking the trends of standard industry practice.

Jackson's only solo full length album to date, ''Cordell Jackson &mdash; Live in Chicago'' was released on Bughouse Records in 1997. Information and memorabilia about Jackson is included in the Smithsonian Institution's Memphis Rock 'n' Soul Museum in Memphis.

==Trivia==
* Appeared in a Bud Light commercial where she interrupts Brian Setzer during his rehearsal, to teach him a fast lesson on how to play rock-and-roll guitar.
* Had a role as "Bathroom Lady" in the 1992 film The Gun in Betty Lou's Handbag.

'''Cordell Jackson''' (* US-amerikanische Labelbetreiberin. 

Sie wurde als Tochter eines Fiddlers in Pontotoc, Mississippi, geboren. Sie lernte Instrumente wie Gitarre, Piano und Standbass, später auch Mandoline, Banjo und Mundharmonika. Bekannt wurde sie jedoch mit ihrer elektrischen Gitarre, einer Hagstrom. 

Memphis, Tennessee. Nach einigen Jahren in der lokalen Szene, in denen sie nicht nur musizierte, sondern auch für sich und andere Songs schrieb, aufnahm und produzierte, gründete sie 1956 ihr eigenes Label Moon-Records. Nachdem sie hier erst ihre eigene Single "Bebopper's Christmas" b/w "Rock and Roll Christmas" veröffentlicht hatte, brachte sie bald auch Rockabilly-Singles anderer KünstlerInnen auf den Markt. Der bekannteste Moon-Act war Allen Page and the Big Four. 

In den 1970er und 1980er Jahren entwickelte Jackson einen Comedy-Act namens Maxie Pearl (als Alter Ego zur populären Country-Comedy-Figur Minnie Pearl), nahm einen Song namens "Football Widow" auf und produzierte eine christliche Radiosendung.

Ein Comeback in die nationale und internationale Rockabilly-Szene gelang ihr während des Rockabilly- und Roots-Rock-Revivals in den 80ern durch die Aufmerksamkeit jüngerer Künstler wie Tav Falco und Alex Chilton. Sie nahm neue Stücke auf und reaktivierte das Moon-Records-Label. 

Sie wurde zur Legende als "The Rockin' Granny". Ihr Markenzeichen wurden neben der E-Gitarre ein bewusst altmodisches Vorkriegskleid. Sie galt als äußerst humorvoll, unkonventionall und eigenständig. Noch in hohem Alter soll sie sehr jugendlich und schwungvoll gewesen sein.