{{Világörökség|
név=Róma történelmi központja|
kép=RomaClivusScauri.JPG|
felirat=Servius-féle fal, Porta Caelemontana|
ország=Olaszország|
kategória=Kulturális világörökségi helyszínek|
típus=Kulturális helyszín|
év=1980|}}

A '''Servius-féle fal''' (''murus Servii Tullii'') a Servius király idejéből származó római fal, mely körülvette az egész akkori várost. 

Vonalát maradványai nyomán csaknem teljes határozottsággal lehet megállapítani. A város területe Augustus idején bővül északkelet felé a Quirinalis, a Viminalis, a Cispius és az Oppius mögötti (az utóbbi kettőnél a közös Esquilinus mons és Esquiliae néven nevezett) magaslattal, dél felé a már Ancus Martius alatt betelepített Aventinus mons (Aventinus-domb) területével. Az Aventinus és Capitolinus közötti Tiberis-partot kereken 400 méter hosszúságban szintén a város belsejéhez kapcsolja a partokig épített fal. 

Mivel így a Tiberisen át vezető ősrégi Sublicus-híd (latinul ''pons Sublicius'') egyenesen a város belső területére vezet, az átkelés megakadályozására ez időben szállják meg a ''Janiculus mons'' (Janiculum, vagy Janiculum-domb) magaslatát különálló erődítéssel. 

Maga a Servius-féle fal hatalmas (59 cm × 59 cm × 150 cm) kockakövekből, a helyszínen tört tufából épült, a völgyekben úgy látszik kettős falazással, a dombok lejtőin a hegy szegélyénél valamivel alább. Legerősebb az Esquilina közti kb. 1300 méteren volt, ahol a 15 méter magas, 4 méter vastag fal előtt 30 méter széles és 9 méter mély árok húzódott, belülről pedig hatalmas földtöltés (''agger Servii Tullii'') emelkedett egészen a fal koronájáig, hogy a védők kényelmesen helyezkedhessenek el a fal oromzatánál. Bástyák -úgy tűnik- csak a kapuknál voltak. 

thumb|Large section of the Servian Wall visible next to the railway station of Termini.
thumb|The [[arch of Gallienus, the ancient Porta Esquilina, was an opening in the Servian Wall. It was the starting point of the via Labicana and via Tiburtina.]]
thumb|Map of ancient Rome, with the Servian Wall and gates highlighted (click on the map to enlarge)
The '''Servian Wall''' (in  Latin: ''Murus Servii Tullii'') was a defensive barrier constructed around the city of Rome in the early 4th century BC. The wall was 3.6&nbsp;m thick, 11&nbsp;km long, and had more than a dozen gates.

The Servian Wall is named after the sixth Roman King, Brennus.  Due to the ease with which the Gauls entered the city, it is conjectured that at some time previous to this, Rome had been forced by its  Etruscan rulers to dismantle any significant prior defences.

The wall was built from large blocks of tuff<!--NOT tufa--> quarried from the Grotta Oscura quarry near Rome's early rival Veii. In addition to the blocks, some sections of the structure incorporated a deep ''fossa'', or ditch in front of it, as a means to effectively heighten the wall during attack from invaders. Along part of its topographically weaker northern perimeter was an agger, a defensive ramp of earth heaped up to the wall along the inside. This thickened the wall, and also gave defenders a base to stand while repelling any attack. The wall was also outfitted with defensive war engines, including catapults.

The Servian Wall was formidable enough to repel Carthaginian army to Rome as part of a feint to draw the Roman army from Capua. When it was clear that this had failed he turned away.

The wall was still maintained in the end of the Republic and the early Empire.  By this time, Rome had already begun to grow outside the original Servian walls. The organization of Rome into  regions under Augustus placed regions II, III, IV, VI, VIII, X, XI within the Servian Wall, with the other sections outside of it.

The walls became unnecessary as Rome became well protected by the ever expanding military strength of the Republic and of the later Empire. As the city continued to grow and prosper, it was essentially unwalled for the first three centuries of the Empire. However, when the city came under attack from barbarian tribes in the 3rd century, Emperor Aurelian was forced to build the larger Aurelian Walls to protect Rome.

Sections of the Servian Wall are still visible in various locations around Rome. The largest section is preserved just outside Termini Station, the main railway station in Rome (including a small piece in a McDonald's dining area at the station). Another notable section on the Aventine incorporates an arch for a defensive catapult from the late Republic.