thumb|187px|Martín Enríquez de Almanza

Don '''Martín Enríquez de Almanza''' (décès ca. Pérou. Son lieu de naissance et ses origines sont incertains. Quelques historiens spéculent sur de possibles origines sépharades du Vice-roi, mais ceci n'a jamais été confirmé.

==Gouvernement==

Ayant été nommé Vice-roi par le Veracruz, est de déloger les pirates anglais de l’''Isla de Sacrificios''<ref> : vue satellite de l’''Isla de Sacrificios''. et [http://www.ine.gob.mx/ueajei/publicaciones/libros/2/sav.html description du système récifal de Veracruz]</ref>, une base qu'ils utilisent pour leurs rapines sur les côtes et l'attaque des bateaux espagnols.

Lorsqu'il arrive à Mexico, il prend des mesures immédiates pour que s'apaise la tourmente causée par l'ancien président de l'Audiencia, Alonso de Muñoz. 

Enríquez de Almanza agit en tant que médiateur entre les clergé séculier, contraignant frères, nones et autres membres du clergé régulier à se retirer dans les couvents. Le clergé régulier refusa d'obéir à cette disposition, débutant ainsi le conflit. Les Franciscains menacèrent d'abandonner la ville et commencèrent en fait à marcher vers Veracruz. Ils furent attaqués par les indiens et sommés de revenir par le Vice-roi. Après avoir obtenu quelques concessions, il rentrèrent à Mexico.

En San Felipe (Guanajuato) et de nombreuses autres villes et villages ainsi que des collèges et couvents. En 1571, il commence la construction de la cathédrale métropolitaine de Mexico.

==Établissement de l'Inquisition==

Pendant le mandat d'Enríquez de Almanza, l'Inquisition espagnole est formellement établie. Pedro Moya de Contreras, le premier inquisiteur de Nouvelle-Espagne, arrive en 1571. 

Composée d'un groupe d'évêques et parfois dirigée par l'Archevêque de Mexico, le Tribunal du Saint-Office (nom officiel de l'Inquisition) a pour mission de superviser et contrôler les pratiques religieuses des indigènes et d’éradiquer le judaïsme, le marranisme et le protestantisme.

thumb|Martín Enríquez de Almanza

'''Don Martín Enríquez de Almanza''' (d. ca. March 13, 1583) was the fourth viceroy of New Spain, who ruled from November 5, 1568 until October 3, 1580. He was subsequently viceroy of Peru, from September 23, 1581 until his death in 1583. His birthplace and origins are uncertain. Some historians speculate on possible Sephardic origins of this viceroy, but that has not been confirmed.

==Government and actions==
Having been chosen by the Council of the Indies (Consejo de Indias) as viceroy, his first actions upon arrival in New Spain, at Veracruz, were to dislodge the English pirates from the Isla de Sacrificios, a base they had been using to raid the coast and Spanish shipping. When he arrived in Mexico City, he immediately took steps to end the turmoil left by the former president of the Real Audiencia, Alonso Muñoz. Enríquez de Almanza also acted as a mediator between the bishops and the religious orders operating in New Spain. The dispute between these two religious groups dated from the viceroyalty of Gastón de Peralta, marqués de Falces, when a royal disposition stipulated that the administration of the parishes was the responsibility of the secular clergy, obliging friars, nuns and members of the regular clergy to retreat to convents. The regular clergy refused to obey this disposition, beginning the conflict. The Franciscans threatened to abandon the city, and in fact began a march to Veracruz. They were threatened by Indians and ordered to return by the viceroy. After receiving some concessions, they returned to Mexico City.

In 1570 the viceroy personally led an expedition against the Indian tribes that had been devastating the interior. He established presidios at Ojuelos and Portezuelos, on the road to Zacatecas. He founded the Villa de San Felipe (Guanajuato) and many other towns and villages, as well as colleges and convents. In 1573 he began the construction of the Cathedral of Mexico City.

==Establishment of the Inquisition==
During the government of Enríquez de Almanza, the Inquisition (Tribunal del Santo Oficio) was formally established in New Spain. Pedro Moya de Contreras, the first inquisitor in New Spain, arrived in 1571. Composed of a group of high ranking bishops and sometimes led by the archbishop of Mexico City, the Inquisition had special instructions to oversee and control the religious practices of Spaniards and non-indigenous residents in the territory, and to persecute and eradicate any Jewish communities or communities of Marranos (judaizantes), as well as any Protestants.

This religious court became quite active. The first victims of the Inquisition in the New World were two Englishmen and an Irishman, burnt at the stake in Mexico City Autos de Fe were held. Most of these 200 people were burnt alive in public plazas or tortured to death in secret dungeons, both scattered throughout what is now downtown Mexico City. The viceroy was required to attend these ceremonies. 

==Protector of the Indians==
An active protector of the Indians, Enríquez de Almanza brought medical attention to the unprotected and helped those in critical conditions. He established hospitals in the city to treat the victims of a terrible epidemic (thought to be chicken pox or varicella) that left 3,000 people dead. He published regulations in which the social protection of the Indians was guaranteed against their Spanish patrons, and a fair salary was assured for those who worked as peasants and farmers.