thumb|386px|right|The start of ''Adeste Fideles''.
"'''Adeste Fideles'''" is the name of a hymn tune written by John Francis Wade in 1743 and the first line of the Latin text for which the tune was written. The text itself has unclear beginnings, and may have been written in the 13th century, though it has been concluded that Wade was probably the author.<ref name="Stephan">
</ref>
The original four verses of the hymn were extended to a total of eight, and these have been translated into many languages many times, though the English ''O Come All Ye Faithful'' is particularly widespread.

==Tune==
Before the emergence of John Francis Wade as the probable composer, the tune had been purported to be written by several musicians; from John Reading and his son, to Handel including a Portuguese musician, Marcos Antonio da Fonseca who wasn't born until after the tune was first published. There are several similar musical themes written around that time, though it can be hard to determine whether these were written in imitation of the hymn, the hymn was based on them, or they are totally unconnected.

The earliest existing manuscript shows both words and tune. It was published in the 1760 edition of ''Evening Offices of the Church''. John Francis Wade included it in his own publication of ''Cantus Diversi'' (1751). It also appeared in Samuel Webbe's ''An Essay on the Church Plain Chant'' (1782).

==Text==
The original text was at one time attributed to various groups and individuals, including claims that it was written by the 13th century German, Portuguese and Spanish orders have, at various times been given credit. It is also possible that the tune was written by one of Wade's contemporary Jacobites, though it does seem likely that Wade himself wrote the words and then the tune to fit.

The original text consisted of four Latin verses, and it was with these that the hymn was originally published, however The Abbé Etienne Jean Francois Borderies wrote an additional three verses in the early 18th century. These are normally printed as the third to fifth of seven verses, while another anonymous additional Latin verse is rarely printed. The text has been translated innumerable times, but the most used version today is the English "O come all ye faithful", this is a combination of one of Frederick Oakeley's translations of the original four verses, and by William Thomas Brooke of the remainder, which was first published in ''Murray's Hymnal'' in 1852.

Adeste Fideles can also be used with the words to "How Firm a Foundation". http://www.cyberhymnal.org/htm/h/f/hfirmafo.htm

==Performance==

In performance verses are often omitted, either because the hymn is too long in its entirety or because the words are unsuitable for the day on which they are sung. For example the eighth anonymous verse is only sung on Epiphany, if at all; while the last verse of the original is normally reserved for midnight Mass.

In the organ accompaniment in verse 7 (verse 4 in the original), which is sung in unison. 

This carol has served as the second-last hymn sung at the Festival of Nine Lessons and Carols in King's College, Cambridge, after the last lesson from Chapter 1 of the Gospel of John.

==In popular culture==
The tune has been adapted many times and the entire hymn is very popular, for example:

*Victor Hely-Hutchinson included this carol in the first and last movements of his Carol Symphony. 

*Franz Liszt wrote a transcription as the fourth movement of his Weihnachtsbaum cycle (S186).

*The French organist-composer organ

*This song was reportedly the favorite Christmas hymn of U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower. 

*The chant "Why Are We Waiting?", which is frequently performed spontaneously at public gatherings to express frustration at delays, is also sung to the same tune.

*Portuguese American singer/songwriter Jorge Ferreira and his 2 daughters Alison and Elizabeth Marie recorded "Oh Come All Ye Faithful" on Jorge's Christmas album ''Canta Natal'' (1994). Jorge Ferreira only performed on background vocals.

thumb|386px|right|Primele măsuri din ''Adeste Fideles''.

'''Adeste fideles''' sau '''O Come All Ye Faithful''' e o anglofone, dar nu exclusiv; colinda fie de început, fie de încheiere din rânduiala slujbei colindelor ''(Carols Service)''.

Se pare că "Adeste fideles" ar fi fost scrisă în englez refugiat la Douai (Franţa).

În 1860, ''Adeste fideles'' apare în ''Evening Offices of the Church''. John Francis Wade a mai publicat-o în ''Cantus Diversi'' (1751). Următoarea publicare s-a făcut în cartea lui Samuel Webbe: ''An Essay on the Church Plain Chant'' (1782).

Strofele latineşti 1-3 şi 6 au fost traduse în engleză de Frederick Oakeley în 1841, pe când strofele 4 şi 5 au fost traduse şi adăugate mai târziu de William Thomas Brooke. Acest text complet a fost publicat pentru prima dată în imnarul lui Murray în 1852.

În limba germană a fost tradus în 1823 şi publicat în 1826, de către Friedrich Heinrich Ranke, cu titlul ''Herbei, o ihr Gläub'gen''.

În limba română au existat mai multe versiuni: unele fiind traduceri din latină, altele din engleză, iar altele fiind compoziţii independente, adaptate după melodia originallă. Versiunea cea mai cunoscută e ''Creştinilor, astăzi'', de origine romano-catolică.