'''''The House That Shadows Built''''' is a 1931 feature from Paramount Pictures, celebrating the studio's 20th anniversary. The hour-length feature includes a brief history of Paramount, interviews with various actors, and clips from upcoming projects (some of which actually never came to fruition).

The film is most notable for a six-minute short starring the Monkey Business''. The short film, containing material which was never included in any other Marx Brothers film, is a re-working of the first scene of their first successful Broadway play ''I'll Say She Is'' (which Groucho considered to have been the funniest work in the Brothers' career). Except for a few name changes and additional gags, the scene is almost completely the same as the script used for the stage production. Some of the gags had been worked into the lobby scene in ''The Cocoanuts'', and a bit involving a series of Maurice Chevalier imitations was incorporated into the script of ''Monkey Business''.

The Marx Brothers' segment is currently available as a special feature on the direct-to-DVD documentary ''Inside the Marx Brothers'', albeit in poor condition. Recently, Marx Brothers fans have begun referring to their segment simply as ''I'll Say She Is'', in light of its source material. 

'''''The House that Shadows Built''''' er en amerikansk film fra 1931 fra Paramount Pictures i anledningen feiringen av deres 20 års-jubileum. Den timeslange filmen inkluderer en kort historie om Paramount, intervjuer med ulike skuespillere, og klipp fra kommende filmprosjekter (noen av dem ble faktisk aldri noe av).

Filmen er mest minneverdig for en episode på seks minutters med Brødrene Marx. Hensikten deres var å gjøre reklame for deres kommende film ''Monkey Business''. Kortfilmen som aldri ble vist i noen annen filmutgivelse de gjorde, er bearbeidelsen av den første scenen i deres første suksessfulle Broadway-show, ''I’ll say She Is'' (som Groucho i parentes bemerket har sagt var deres morsomste arbeid i brødrenes karriere). Med unntak for noen endringer av navn og noen ekstra gags var scenen omtrent akkurat slik som den var beskrevet i manusskriptet.

Denne scenen er også tilgjengelig i en DVD-utgivelse av en dokumentar om Brødrene Marx kalt ''Inside the Marx Brothers''.