Il '''paradosso di Richard''' è stato proposto dal francese Jules Antoine Richard nel 1905. Esso può essere illustrato nei seguenti termini.

Prendiamo in considerazione un numeri reali costruibili. Esempi di frasi di questo tipo sono ''"il numero il cui quadrato è 7 parole); ''"il numero dato dal rapporto tra la 17 parole).

Sia ''R<sub>n</sub>'' l'insieme – ovviamente finito - dei numeri reali definibili con ''n'' parole e segni del nostro vocabolario. Consideriamo ora l'insieme ''R'' dato dall'unione di tutti gli insiemi '''R<sub>''n''</sub>''' (con ''n'' = 3,4,5, …): ''R'' è ovviamente numerabile e possiamo ordinare i suoi elementi nella successione r<sub>1</sub>, r<sub>2</sub>, r<sub>3</sub>, …. ''R'' rappresenta dunque l'insieme di tutti e soli quei numeri reali definibili con un numero finito di elementi del nostro vocabolario.

Consideriamo ora il numero ''r'' (possiamo battezzarlo '''numero di Richard''') definito nel modo seguente:
:il numero la cui parte intera è 9 lo si sostituisce con zero)
Da un lato, possiamo constatare dalla frase sopra riportata che  ''r'' è  un numero reale definibile con una quantità finita di parole o segni del nostro vocabolario e quindi deve essere incluso in ''R''; dall'altro lato, esso (per il modo in cui è costruito) è diverso da tutti i numeri reali contenuti in ''R'' e quindi non vi risulta incluso. Di qui il paradosso.

'''Richard's paradox''' is a fallacious mathematical mapping first described by the French mathematician Jules Richard in 1905.  Today, it is ordinarily used in order to show the importance of carefully distinguishing between mathematics and metamathematics.

== Description of the paradox ==

Consider a language (such as English) in which the arithmetical properties of integers are defined.  For example, "the first natural number" defines the property of being the first natural number, one; and "not divisible by any integer other than 1 and itself" defines the property of being a lexicographically (in dictionary order).
<!-- in a definite way, such that one definition will precede another if the length of the first is less than the length of the second, and, if two definitions have the same number of characters, one of them will precede the other on the basis of the alphabetical order of the letters in each.  (Obviously, punctuation must first be given a priority in the alphabetical order, such as "...'y', 'z', '.', ';', ',', ...", or something similar.)-->

Now, we may map each definition to the set of cardinal numbers, such that the definition with the smallest number of characters and alphabetical order will correspond to the number 1, the next definition in the series will correspond to 2, and so on. Since each definition is associated with a unique integer, then it is possible that occasionally the integer assigned to a definition ''fits'' that definition, i.e. the number of letters in the definition equals the integer. If, for example, the 43 letters long (ignoring the spaces) description "not divisible by any integer other than 1 and itself" were assigned to the number 43, then this would be true. Since 43 is itself not divisible by any integer other than 1 and itself, then the number of this definition has the property of the definition itself. However, this may not always be the case. If the definition: "the first natural number" were assigned to the number 4, then the number of the definition does ''not'' have the property of the definition itself. This latter example will be termed as having the property of being ''Richardian''.  Thus, if a number is Richardian, then the definition corresponding to that number is a property that the number itself does not have. (More formally, "''x'' is Richardian" is equivalent to "''x'' does ''not'' have the property designated by the defining expression with which ''x'' is correlated in the serially ordered set of definitions".)

Now, since the property of being Richardian is itself a numerical property of integers, it belongs in the list of all definitions of properties.  Therefore, the property of being Richardian is assigned some integer, ''n''. Finally, the paradox becomes: Is ''n'' Richardian? Suppose ''n'' is Richardian. This is only possible if ''n'' does not have the property designated by the defining expression which ''n'' is correlated with. In other words, this means ''n'' is not Richardian, contradicting our assumption. However, if we suppose ''n'' is not Richardian, then it does have the defining property which it corresponds to. This, by definition, means that it is Richardian, again contrary to assumption. Thus, the statement "''n'' is Richardian" can not consistently be designated as either true or false.

== Resolving the paradox ==

Richard's Paradox is fallacious.  An essential but tacit assumption concerning the ordering of definitions was ignored while setting up the paradox.

It was agreed to consider the arithmetical properties of integers, ''i.e.'', properties that can be spoken about using additions, multiplication, etc., but then later in the paradox a definition was added to the series which involves reference to the ''notation'' used in arithmetical properties.  The definition of being Richardian does not belong to the series initially intended, because this definition involves meta-mathematical notions such as the number of letters occurring in expressions.