'''''Brand''''' is a play by the Norwegian playwright Henrik Ibsen. It is a verse tragedy, written in 1865 and first performed in Stockholm on 24 March 1867.  Brand was an intellectual play that caused many people to "think outside the box".

Brand is a priest who wants to take consequence of his choices, and is therefore deeply bound to doing the "right thing". He believes primarily in the will of man, and lives by the device "all or nothing". To make compromises is therefore difficult, or by his moral standards questionable at best. His picture of God is clearly derived from the Old Testament. His beliefs render him lonely in the end, as people around him, when put to the test, as a rule can not or will not follow his example. Brand is arguably a young idealist with a main purpose: to save the world, or at least Man's soul. His visions are great, but his judgement of others may seem harsh and unfair. 

==Plot==
===First act===

At the beginning of the play, we find Brand in the mountains, and confronting three different kinds of people: a farmer, who doesn't dare to brave an unsure glacier on behalf of his dying daughter, the crazy beggar-girl Gerd, who claims to know a bigger church in the hills, and hunts for a great hawk, and finally, Einar, a young painter with an easy-going attitude, and his fiancée, Agnes. Einar and Brand were in school together, and their conversation ends in a long discussion about the envisioning of God. Brand taunts Einar for portraying God as an old man, who "sees through his fingers", and wants to envision God as a young, heroic saviour. He means that people have become too sloppy about their sins and shortcomings, because of the dogma that Christ, through his sacrifice, cleansed humanity once and for all. 

In the end, Brand vows to take a fight, mainly in his own soul, with those three "minds" he just met: The lazy mind (the farmer), the wild mind (Gerd), end the easy-goer (Einar). He ponders Man's purpose, and the difference between what is, and what should be. Here, we find the famous sentence: ''What you are, be fully, not in parts and pieces''.

===Second act===

Brand enters the valley in which he was born, and finds great famine and need. The local mayor distributes bread for the hungry in strict rations, and Brand questions the need for it. Meanwhile, a mother comes from the other side of the fjord, telling of her husband who needs absolution, because he, in dire need, killed two of his children rather than seeing them starve. Then he harmed himself. Nobody dares to venture the high sea, but Brand goes in a boat and, to his surprise, Agnes follows him. Together, they sail across, and the man gets his absolution. Brand muses over the remaining children, and what this experience might do to them, when a couple of farmers show up and demand that he stay with them as their priest. Brand is reluctant to do this, but they use his own words against him, and he gives in. 

Agnes, sitting on the beach, looks into herself, and tells of an "inner world being born", in one of Ibsen's best known soliloquies. She renounces her former fiancée Einar and goes with Brand. In the end of the second act, we meet Brand's mother, and learn that he grew up under the glacier, in a dreary place with no sun. His mother robbed his father while he was on his deathbed, and as a consequence, Brand does not want her money, but she urges him to take it.

===Third act===

Some years later, Brand and Agnes live together with their son, Ulf, who is grievously ill because of the climate. The local doctor urges him to leave for the sake of his son, and he hesitates. Meanwhile, his mother is dying, and Brand impresses on her that she will not get her priest unless she gives all her money to charity. She refuses to do so, and so Brand refuses to go to her. 

On the question of his son's health, the doctor points out that it is right to be "humane", whereas Brand answers: "Was God humane towards his son?" He states that by modern standards, the sacrifice of Christ would have boiled down to a "diplomatic heavenly charter", and no more. He clearly means there's a difference between being a "human", and being a "humanist". In the end he almost gives in, but the farmers come to him and plead with him to stay. Then Gerd shows up, and states that evil forces will prevail if he leaves. The final straw is when she points out that the son is his "false god". Then he gives in and stays, knowing this will take his son's life. It is clear, however, that he wants Agnes to choose for him, and she answers: "Go the road your God appointed for you".

===Fourth act===

After the death of his son, Brand schemes to build a bigger church in the parish. The old one is too small to cope with his visions. He has hardened somewhat, and refuses to mourn. Agnes comforts herself with the clothes of her dead child.
The local mayor is mostly opposing him, but tells him that he has rising support in the parish and of his plans for a jail/labor facility. He also tells him how his mother was forced to break bonds with her true love, and married an old miser instead. The boy then became father of Gerd, while Brand is the result of the other, clearly loveless affair. During the act, a beggar-woman arrives, demanding clothes for her freezing child (it's Christmas Eve). Brand then puts Agnes to the test, and gradually, all her dead child's clothes are given to the beggar-woman. As a result of this, Agnes renounces her life, and exclaims "I'm free". Brand accepts with effort, and Agnes dies.

===Fifth act===

Brand gets his new church built (in the 1860s, many old Norwegian churches were replaced by newer and bigger ones). 
Brand understands that his new and bigger church is too small, and rebels against the authorities, the local dean and the mayor. The provost talks about getting people to heaven "by the parish", and denounces individual thinking. The provost's speech should be examined in detail, also because he has a vision of the masses "marching with equal steps" towards salvation, and stressing that freedom. This speech has been interpreted as holding a fascist undertone. In fact, the provost mentions that the ideal of a religious leader is "a corporal" that shall hold the masses in line. Rendered in Norwegian, the word "fører-ideal" is used in this passus (rhyming on corporal), something that to Norwegian (and German) ears easily could be interpreted as a foreshadowing of Hitler (''fører'' = ''führer''). Brand's answers to this are mostly sarcastic. The provost ends his speech mentioning the "erasing of God in the soul of man", something he seems to approve. Brand, of course, wants the opposite: individual freedom and a clear picture of God in man's soul.
 
Einar returns as a gloomy missionary soon after the provost's friendly speech. He has worked out a view of life that makes Brand shiver. Whereas Brand mourns the loss of his wife, Einar in the end thinks her death was righteous, because he regards her as a female seducer. Upon learning this, Brand shoves him off. 

In the end, Brand protests the heavy plight lain upon him by his elders, and throws the key to the church into the river and makes for the mountain with the entire parish following him. He holds a great speech, and urges the people to "lift their faith", to make their christianity surge through their entire existence, and in a way make a "Church without limits", that is meant to embrace all sides of life. In the end, he states that they all shall be priests in the task of relieving all people in the country from mental thralldom. To this, the local clergy protest, because they no longer have any sway over their flock. He is greatly loved and respected by the commoners, but the test is in the end too hard. They are lured down again by the mayor, who fakes news of great economical opportunity (a great amount of fish in the sea). The same people who followed him, then chase him with stones in their hands.
Brand is then left alone, struggling with doubt, remorse, and temptation, "the spirit of compromise". He does not yield to it, even when the spirit claims to be Agnes, something Brand doubts. The spirit says that the fall of man forever closed the gates to Paradise, but Brand states that the road of longing is still open. Then the spirit flees and says: "Die! The world does not need you!". Brand meets Gerd again, who thinks she sees the saviour in him, and Brand denies this, of course. At the very end of the play, Gerd takes him to the glacier, her personal church, and Brand recoils when understanding where he is, the "Ice-cathedral". He breaks down in tears. Gerd, being a hunter from the start of the play, fires a shot at the hawk, and lets loose a great avalanche, which in the end buries the entire valley.

'''Brand''' er et drama på verseform av Henrik Ibsen, utgitt i 1866, om presten som stiller ultimate krav til seg selv og sine omgivelser, noe som går dramatisk ut over hans aller nærmeste, mor, kone og barn. Stykket hadde premiere i Stockholm 24. mars 1885.

==Rollene==

==Handlingen==

===Første akt===
Vi møter Brand på vei over en isbre. Bak ham følger den en bonde og sønnen hans. Bonden har tatt på seg å vise Brand veien over vidda, men kvier seg fordi Brand går raskt fram over i et usikkert område. I enden gir bonden opp og reiser hjem, selv om han har bedt Brand om å gå sognebud til en syk datter.
Etter at han er kommet over Breen er Brand framme ved kanten av den dalen han vokste opp i. Nedenfor ham ser han et muntert følge av ungdommer som prater og ler. To av dem skiller seg ut og danser bortover. Det er Agnes og Einar. Brand advarer dem før de går baklengs utfor et juv, og Einar kjenner igjen Brand som en skolekamerat fra barneårene. Einar er maler, og han og Brand drøfter hvordan det et riktig å avbilde Gud. Imens avslører Brand sitt gudssyn. Han skilles fra de to, men Agnes står tankefull igjen etter ham.
Mens Brand nærmer seg veien nedover mot dalen, møter han taterjenta Gerd. Hun kaster stein etter en hauk, og advarer Brand mot kirken der nede. Hun vil vise ham en større oppe på heia. Brand går fra henne i tanker og erklærer at han vil ta et oppgjør med disse tre sinnelagene han har møtt, også i seg selv: Slappsinnet (bonden), lettsinnet (Einar), og villsinnet (Gerd).

===Annen akt===
Nede i bygda viser det seg å være stor nød. Vi møter en desperat situasjon der fogden, den lokale myndigheten, deler ut matrasjoner til en nødstedt allmue. Brand kommer fram og refser fogden for innstillingen hans, og får kjeft som svar. Da dukker en fortvilet mor opp med bud om en nødlidende far som har tatt livet av de to yngste barna heller enn å se dem sulte. På den andre siden av fjorden er det enda verre stilt. Kona ber noen om å komme mannen til hjelp, og Brand stiller opp. Han tar ut i båt på fjorden, i et vær der ingen andre ville våget en slik overfart. Han ber om at en skal komme med ham for å øse, og det er bare en som stiller opp - Agnes! Sammen seiler de over, og Brand gir den arme faren syndsforlatelse. Når dette er over, kommer to av bygdens menn til ham og ber ham om å slå seg til som prest for dem, men Brand kvier seg - han ønsker en større oppgave. Imens sitter Agnes på stranda og ser innover i seg selv, og hennes monolog her kalles ofte et av de vakreste partiene i skuespillet.  
Etter dette dukker Brands mor opp. Dermed kommer det fram at Brand vokste opp i den delen av dalen der sola aldri falt, rett under breen. Moren er pengekjær, og Brand anklager henne for det. Hun anklager Brand for å ikke ha fulgt opp farens arv, som Brand mener hun stjal fra ham på farens dødsleie. Men denne dialogen ender med at Brand likevel velger å bli i bygda som prest. Mot slutten av akta kommer det til avklaring mellom Brand og Einar - Agnes velger å gå med Brand.

===Tredje akt===

Det har gått tre år, og Brand og Agnes har fått en sønn, Alf. Men klimaet i dalen er usunt, og gutten er syk. Mens Brand sliter med et vanskelig valg, skal han bli i bygda som prest eller reise bort for å berge sønnens liv, ligger også moren hans for døden. Og her kommer den gamle konflikten fram igjen. Brand vet at morens formue er skaffet på tvilsomt vis, og vil ikke ha den. Han krever av moren at hun skal skjenke alt til de fattige. Moren nekter fordi hun vil skjenke alt til sønnen. Dermed kan ikke Brand for sin samvittighets skyld gi henne syndsforlatelse på dødsleiet. Denne konflikten følges gjennom hele akten. Imens kommer doktoren ut og setter ultimatum: Enten må Brand reise mot sør med Alf, eller så dør gutten. Brand ønsker met av alt å reise, men bygda krever ham som prest. Han har nesten bestemt seg for å bryte opp da Gerd viser seg, og påpeker at når presten reiser, vil mørkemaktene rå i bygda. Dette gir utslaget for Brand, men han lar Agnes velge for seg. Hun forstår Brands kval, men stiller seg og sønnen som offer for Brands sak. De velger å bli i bygda.

===Fjerde akt===

Det er jul året etter. Det er stille på prestegården, og Agnes driver ensom og rådløs omkring i stua mens hun venter på Brand. Brand har på et vis hardnet til etter sønnens død. Han har planer om å bygge en større kirke - visjonene hans får ikke plass inne i det gamle kirkerommet, mener han. Imot ham står fogden som ønsker å få bygda med på å bygge et samfunnshus med fengsel og dårekiste og derfor hadde håpet på Brands støtte ettersom han nå medgir at Brand har menigheten med seg. Men når han hører at Brand vil finansiere kirken med morsarven, snur han og støtter planen. Samtidig forteller fogden ham om moren til Brand, som i sin ungdom ble nektet å gifte seg med den hun var glad i. Gutten slo lag med et taterfølge og ble far til Gerd. Moren til Brand ble etter hennes fars ønske giftet bort til en rik bonde i bygda. Ekteskapet ble kjærlighetsløst.
Agnes kritiserer Brand fordi han tilsynelatende nekter å sørge over Alf. Brand på sin side refser Agnes for å henge ved barneklærne og trøste seg ved dem. Han ber om en løsning for Agnes, og denne kommer i form av en tatermor med et frysende spebarn på armen. Brand krever at Agnes skal kle dette barnet i den døde sønnens klær, og Agnes gir gradvis etter. Offeret er nødvendig i en trengt situasjon, men forferdelig for Agnes. Hun beholder allikevel Alfs dåpslue som hun gjemmer på brystet. da Brand ser dette, krever han henne igjen, og Agnes gir etter. Når offeret er gitt, erklærer Agnes seg fri, og forteller Brand at det nå er hans tur til å ofre - Agnes. Hun forteller at hun snart skal dø. Med stor overvinnelse aksepterer Brand.

===Femte akt===
Enda et år er gått, og Brand har fått bygget en ny kirke, mye større enn den gamle. Han merker likevel at noe er galt - kirken gir ikke det svaret han gjerne skulle hatt. Dagen er kommet for at kirken skal innvies med pomp og prakt, og prosten selv kommer for å overvære det hele. Når begivenheten inntreffer, gjør Brand opprør, låser av kirken og kaster nøkkelen i elva. Han vil ikke tjene en slik øvrighet. Han holder en flammende tale og vekker menigheten til utferd, og de reiser opp på vidda. Prost og fogd står alene igjen.