La '''basilica della Natività''' è una basilica di Betlemme eretta nel luogo in cui, secondo la tradizione, avvenne la nascita di Gesù. È costituita dalla combinazione di due chiese e da una cripta, la Grotta della Natività, che si ritiene essere la grotta ed il luogo preciso in cui Gesù nacque.

La basilica della Natività è una delle mete principali e irrinunciabili dei pellegrinaggi che visitano la Terra Santa, insieme alla basilica dell'Annunciazione di Nazaret e alla chiesa del Santo Sepolcro di Gerusalemme.

== Storia ==
Nel 135, prima che l'edificio fosse costruito, l'imperatore Adriano fece piantare degli alberi fino a formare un bosco, che consacrò al dio Adone. Poi, nel 326, l'augusta dell'Sant’Elena, dietro l'ordine del figlio Costantino I, distrusse il bosco e vi fece erigere una basilica. 

Il primo restauro avvenne nel 540, in seguito alla distruzione causata dalla rivolta dei Samaritani del 529.Comportò il rialzo del pavimento dell'atrio di circa un metro e l'aggiunta di un nartece.

Nel 614 la basilica riuscì a salvarsi dalla distruzione dei persiani grazie alla presenza, sul prospetto del tempio, della raffigurazione dei Re Magi nel costume nazionale persiano.

== Struttura ==
thumb|right|Interno della basilica
Originariamente, all'esterno della struttura vi era un cortile che permetteva l'accesso all'atrio, costituito da colonne e da navate grandi un quarto rispetto a quelle della basilica. Il cortile, molto ampio, serviva da luogo di sosta per i pellegrini; per questo veniva allestito un piccolo mercato. La basilica misura 53,90 metri di lunghezza per 26,20 metri di larghezza nelle cinque navate (nel transetto invece è di 35,82 metri). Finché i pellegrini non furono molto numerosi, come per tutto il IV secolo, quando la comunità cristiana in Palestina era piccola, non vi erano problemi di spazio. 

L'accesso alla basilica è consentito solo attraverso una porta, più simile ad passaggio, stretto e basso, resa così per non far accedere alla basilica a cavallo. Delle tre porte originarie è rimasta solo questa, poiché le altre due sono state murate. 

right|thumb|200px|This silver star, beneath the altar in the Grotto of the Nativity, marks the spot believed to be the Birthplace of [[Jesus.]]thumb|200px|View of The Church of the Nativity from Manger Square
The '''Church of the Nativity''' () in tradition marks as the birthplace of Christ, and it is considered sacred by followers of both Islamic View of Jesus).

==History==

The antiquity of this tradition is attested by the Christian apologist Justin Martyr (c. 100 - 165), who noted in his ''Dialogue with Trypho'' that the Holy Family had taken refuge in a cave outside of town:

<blockquote><!--But when the Child was born in Bethlehem, since-->Joseph<!-- could not find a lodging in that village, he--> took up his quarters in a certain cave near the village; and while they were there Mary brought forth the Christ and placed Him in a manger, and here the Magi who came from Arabia found Him.(chapter LXXVIII).</blockquote>

Origen of Alexandria (185 AD–ca. 254) wrote:

<blockquote>In Bethlehem the cave is pointed out where He was born, and the manger in the cave where He was wrapped in swaddling clothes. And the rumor is in those places, and among foreigners of the Faith, that indeed Jesus was born in this cave who is worshipped and reverenced by the Christians. (''Contra Celsum'', book I, chapter LI).</blockquote>

The first Saint Helena, the mother of the Emperor Samaritan Revolt of 529.

The current basilica was rebuilt in its present form in Persians under Chosroes II invaded in first King of Jerusalem was crowned in the church. Over the years, the compound has been expanded, and today it covers approximately 12,000 square meters.  The church was one of the direct causes for French involvement in the Crimean War against Russia.

The church is administered jointly by Greek Orthodox, Roman Catholic, and Armenian Apostolic authorities. All three traditions maintain monastic communities on the site.

==Compound==
The structure is actually a combination of two churches, with a crypt beneath&mdash;the Grotto of the Nativity&mdash;where Jesus is said to have been born:

200px|thumb|Interior of the Church of the Nativity
*The main '''Basilica of the Nativity''' is maintained by the Greek Orthodox Patriarchate of Jerusalem. It is designed like a typical Roman basilica, with five aisles (formed by lamps throughout the entire building. The wooden rafters were donated by King Edward IV of England. The same king also donated lead to cover the roof; however, this lead was later taken by the Turks, who melted it down for ammunition to use in war against Venice. Stairways on either side of the Sanctuary lead down by winding stairs to the Grotto.

*The adjoining '''Church of St. Catherine''', the Roman Catholic church, was built in a more modern Gothic revival style, and has since been further modernized according to the liturgical trends which followed Vatican II. This is the church where the firman in 1852, under the Ottoman Empire, that is still in force to this day.

left|thumb|200px|The Altar of the Nativity, beneath which is the star marking the spot where tradition says the [[Virgin Mary gave birth to Jesus.]]
*The '''Grotto of the Nativity''', an underground cave located beneath the basilica, enshrines the site where Jesus is said to have been born. The exact spot is marked beneath an altar by a 14-pointed silver star set into the marble floor and surrounded by silver lamps. This altar is denominationally neutral, although it features primarily Armenian Apostolic influences. Another altar in the Grotto, which is maintained by the Roman Catholics, marks the site where traditionally Mary laid the newborn Baby in the manger.

*Numerous '''Chapels''' are found in the compound as well, including the Chapel of Innocents, commemorating the children killed by Herod (Matthew 2:16-18); and the Chapel of Saint Jerome, where traditionally he translated the Bible into Latin (the Vulgate).