thumb|250px|The Rt Hon. The Earl of Derby

'''Edward Henry Stanley, 15th Earl of Derby,''' KG, PC (21 July 1826 &ndash; 21 April 1893) was a British statesman whose father served as Prime Minister of the United Kingdom. 

He was born to Rugby and Lancaster, and then made a long tour in the King's Lynn, which he represented till October 1869, when he succeeded to the peerage. He took his place, as a matter of course, among the Conservatives, and delivered his maiden speech in May 1850 on the sugar duties. Just before, he had made a very brief tour in Jamaica and South America. In 1852 he went to India, and while travelling in that country he was appointed under-secretary for foreign affairs in his father's first administration.

From the outset of his career he was known to be a most Liberal Conservative, and in 1855 Lord Palmerston offered him the post of Dizzy cut his throat, or are you going to be married?" When the object of his sudden appearance had been explained, the Conservative chief received the courteous suggestion of the prime minister with anything but favour, and the offer was declined.

In his father's second administration Lord Stanley held, at first, the office of Secretary of State for the Colonies (1858), but became House of Commons, became the first Secretary of State for India, and left behind him in the India Office an excellent reputation as a man of business.

After the revolution in King Otto, the people most earnestly desired to have Queen Victoria's second son, Prince Alfred, for their king. He declined the honour, and they then took up the idea that the next best thing they could do would be to elect some great and wealthy English noble, not concealing the hope that although they might have to offer him a Civil List he would decline to receive it. Lord Stanley was the prime favourite as an occupant of this bed of thorns, and it has been said that he was actually offered the crown. That, however, is not true; the offer was never formally made.

thumb|200px|Edward Henry Stanley, ''1870''
'''Edward Henry Stanley, 15. Earl of Derby''' KG , PC (* Knowsley) war ein britischer Politiker.

Stanley war der älteste Sohn von Trinity College der Universität Cambridge.

Danach bereiste er die Westindischen Inseln, USA. Stanley saß als Mitglied der Unterhaus. Im März 1852 wurde er Staatssekretär im ''Foreign and Commonwealth Office'' (britisches Außenministerium) im ersten Kabinett seines Vaters.

Obgleich er stets den Liberalen zuneigte, lehnte er 1855 das Angebot des liberalen Premierministers Lord Palmerston ab, das Kolonialministerium zu übernehmen. In der zweiten Regierungszeit seines Vaters, 1858 bis 1859 erhielt er dann genau dieses Ministerium verbunden nun mit einem Sitz im Kabinett. 1859 wurde er nach dem Ende der Herrschaft der britischen Krone übertragen wurde.

Im der dritten Regierungszeit seines Vaters (1866–1868) wurde er Premierminister William Ewart Gladstone im Dezember 1868 sein Amt nieder. Nach dem Tode seines Vaters wurde er im folgenden Jahr Mitglied des House of Lords als ''Earl of Derby''.

Im Kabinett des neu gewählten Premierministers Russischen Türkenkrieg verlangte (siehe auch Reservisten einberief und andere militärische Vorbereitungen traf, schied Stanley, der diese Maßnahmen nicht billigte, am 30. März aus der Regierung. Er wurde durch Robert Cecil ersetzt.