मुळचे सैन्यात असणारे '''किसन बाबुराव''' तथा ''अण्णा'' '''हजारे''' हे महाराष्ट्र राज्यातील ज्येष्ठ समाजसेवक आहेत.
त्यांनी ग्रामस्थांच्या सहकार चळवळीद्वारे राळेगण सिद्धी या गावाचा कायापालट घडवून आणला आहे. स्वच्छता, पाणी व्यस्थापन व सामाजिक सलोखा यावर त्यांनी भर दिला होता. या कामाबद्दल गावाला अनेक पारितोषिके मिळाली आहेत.

या नंतर '''अण्णा हजारे''' यांनी माहितीच्या अधिकारासाठी आंदोलन केले. माहितीच्या अधिकारावर त्यांनी पुस्तकाचे लेखनही केले आहे.
या आंदोलनामुळे सरकारला माहितीचा अधिकार सर्वसामान्यांना देण्याचा  कायदा लवकर संमत करावा लागला.

'''Kisan Baburao Hazare''', popularly known as '''Anna Hazare''' (January 15, 1940), is an Indian social activist who is especially recognized for his contribution to the development of Ralegan Siddhi, a village in Ahmednagar district, Maharashtra, India and his efforts for establishing it as a model village, for which he was awarded the Padma Bhushan by Govt. of India, in 1992.

==Early life==

Anna Hazare was born in a poor family. His father Baburao Hazare was an unskilled labourer and his grandfather worked for the army. Anna's grandfather was deployed in Bhingar which made Baburao and family to move to Bhingar, where Anna was born. Anna'a gradfather passed away in 1945 but the family continue to stay in Bhingar until 1952 when Anna's father resigned from his job and returned to Ralegan Siddhi. Anna had completed his education up to fourth standard and also had six younger siblings. The family's financial situation was tough. Baburao's sister, who was childless offered to take care of Anna and took him to Mumbai. 

Anna's father, Baburao had troubles meeting end and eventually had to sell of his farmland making life tough for the family. This forced Anna who was in Mumbai and just completed his seventh grade in school to take up a job. Anna worked for a florist at rupees a month. He eventually started his own flower shop. Two of his brothers came to Mumbai to join him in his business increasing the family earnings soon to about 700-800 rupees a month.

==Army life==
In a couple of years Anna fell into bad company and started wasting his time and money on vices. He also started getting involved in brawls and fights, especially when he found some simple person being harassed by goons. He became irregular in sending money to his family. The word went around in Ralegan that he had become a bad character himself. In one such fight, Anna bashed up a person rather badly. Fearing arrest, he avoided coming to his regular work and residence for some time. During this period (in April 1960) he appeared in Army recruitment interviews and was selected to join the Indian Army.

For his initial training, he was sent to Punjab as a truck driver. Being far away from home and separated from all his friends, Anna felt lonely. He also had bouts of depression and a feeling of aimlessness in life. He had once resolved to end his life and even wrote a suicide note. However, on further reflection, he realised that his suicide may affect the marriage prospects of his younger sister. Therefore, he decided to postpone the implementation of his resolution until his sister got married.

In the meantime, some events gave his life a new direction. During the Indo-Pak war of 1965, he was driving a military vehicle somewhere on the western front when he saw a Pakistani plane flying low overhead. He and his colleagues jumped out of the vehicle and took shelter in the nearby bushes, lying flat on the ground. The truck was blown up and all his colleagues were killed, but Anna escaped unhurt.

In yet another incident, Anna had a near escape when he was posted in Nagaland. One night, underground Nagas attacked the military post and killed all the inmates. Anna had gone out to answer nature's call at that time and, hence, he was the lone survivor. These two events had a deep impact on Anna's mind. He realised that his life was not to be wasted and he came to believe that God considered his life to be precious. Otherwise, he thought, he could have had died along with his colleagues in either of these incidents.

When these thoughts were churning in his mind, he came across a small booklet titled ''Call to the Youth For Nation Building'' by Swami Vivekananda in a book-stall at the New Delhi station.

Vivekananda's thoughts gave meaning to his life and he decided to devote the rest of his life working for the society. He read many more books by Vivekananda, Mahatma Gandhi and Acharya Vinoba Bhave. His thoughts started developing and in 1970 he told his parents about his decision not to get married. He urged his parents to go ahead and arrange the marriage of his younger brothers. The new-found desire to live beyond his narrow self interest later drove him to seek voluntary retirement from the Army and come back to serve his own village.

He wanted his native village, Ralegan Siddhi, to improve, but did not know how and where to start. He used to come to his village on vacation and spend endless days sitting on the rocks at the outskirts of the village. Having spent most of his life in Mumbai and in the Army, he did not have many friends in the village. Moreover, the people of Ralegan who had known him as an angry young man from the days when he used to sell flowers outside Dadar station, were unaware of the transformation that had taken place in the personality of Anna Hazare.

In 1971, Anna was transferred to Mumbai. From Mumbai he started visiting the village regularly. From 1971 to 1974 his interaction with the village people increased. He also spent about Rs. 3000 for giving a face lift to the Padmavati temple with a coat of oil paint. He also developed good relations with the village youth.

In 1974, he was transferred to Jammu. In 1975, he completed fifteen years of service in Army, a statutory requirement for being entitled to a pension. He sought retirement and, finally, in August 1975, he got relieved from the Army and came back to Ralegan Siddhi for good.
 
===Gandhism===
Anna utilized individual centred Gandhian methods for bringing about moral pressure on the people. When the high school was started in Ralegan Siddhi, and the state government was not ready to sanction grant to the school, Anna quietly started his fast outside the Zilla Parishad's office. When the village people came to know of it they also joined him in hundreds. The state government had to yield to their demand. In another instance, when a couple of families continued to leave their cattle free for grazing in spite of explaining to them the importance of stopping open grazing and of taking up massive tree plantation programme, Anna and some youth members went on fast for two days to make the people understand the seriousness of the ban on open grazing.

==Making of Ralegan Siddhi into a model village==

Ralegan Siddhi was one of the worst victims, hopeless social and economic situation and irresponsible village leadership before 1975 when Kisan Baburao Hazare, affectionately know as Anna Hazare served in Indian army, until he retired voluntarily in 1975. His close brush with death in the 1965 war changed the course of his life. He decided to dedicate himself to work for the welfare of others and returned to work for the betterment of his own village, starting with the re-building of the temple.

Anna Hazare believes that religion has a strong influence on people. He says: “God is everywhere, but a child is first introduced to him in the temple. It is here that he receives education on the important values and morals of life. In a broader sense, the village itself is a temple where people serve and pray and learn the meaning of life.”

The dilapidate condition of the temple in Ralegan Siddhi, from where wood had been used to fuel the liquor dens, symbolized to Anna the condition of the village . Since the temple represents the cultural heart of a community, Anna felt that renovation of the temple would be the best way to demonstrate his unselfish motives and created an interest in  his activities. With his provident fund of Rs.20, 000+/-, Anna began the Renovation. Inspired by his selfless devotion, first the youth, then the rest of villagers slowly began to rally around him. Villagers, especially the youth group began gathering here everyday to discuss their problems and matters related to the welfare of village.

===Watershed development: key to economic growth===

Anna Hazare says, you cannot expect a hungry man to live by principles. His first priority will be to feed himself and his family. Even though jobs, mostly government and army, provided economic certainties for a few most of the population still dependent on agriculture in Ralegan Siddhi. Anna realized that the only way to increase agricultural production in a sustainable manner was to build better irrigation system. Taking into account the geographical location of Ralegan, located in the foothills, Anna Hazare persuaded villagers to construct a watershed embankment to stop water and allow it to percolate and increase ground water level. The first embankment that was built using voluneteer efforts developed a leak and had to reconstructed this time with government funding.

Anna also take steps to stop the second big problem, soil errosion. In order to conserve soil and water by checking the run off, contour trenches and gully pluges were constructed along the hill slopes. Grass, shrubs and about 3 lakh trees were planted along the hillside and the village. This process was supplemented by afforestation, nullah bunds, underground check dams and cemented bandhras at strategic locations. The Watershed Development programme turned into a huge success and helped increase the fortunes of many farmers as they now had a reliable source of water. Ralegan has also experimented with drip and bi-valve irrigation in a big way. Papaya, lemon and chillies have been planted on a plot of eighty acres entirely irrigated by the drip irrigation system. Cultivation of water-intensive crops like sugar cane was banned. Crops such as pulses, oilseeds and certain cash crops with low water requirements were grown. The farmers started growing high yield varieties of crop and the cropping pattern of the village also changed.

Kharif: In 1975-76, 240 hectares were under rain fed Bajra with only twenty hectares of irrigated Bajra. In 1985-86 rain fed Bajra was grown only in sixty hectares whereas 150 hectares were put under high yield Bajra with assured irrigation. Green vegetables were grown only in two hectares in 1975-76. Whereas during 1985-86, sixty hectares were used for growing vegetables. These vegetables found ready markets in Pune and Bombay. There was not much change in the area of oilseeds production. However, in 1985-86, irrigation was extended to fifteen more hectares of land under oilseed crops thus increasing the oilseed production.

Rabi: In 1975-76 rain fed Jowar was grown in 320 hectares and Jowar in fifty hectares was irrigated whereas in 1985-86 Jowar with irrigation was grown in 250 hectares whereas rainfed Jowar was grown only in ninety hectares. During the same period rain fed wheat decreased from twelve hectares to seven hectares and irrigated area under wheat grew from one hectare to twenty three hectares. For oilseeds the irrigated area grew from nil to seventeen hectares and rain fed crop area declined from thirty hectares to ten hectares. Vegetable production during Rabi period particularly received a boost, increasing from three hectares to twenty five hectares.

Ralegan Siddhi exports onion worth Rs.80 lakhs today. As a result of these changes total agricultural production went up from 294.3 tones in 1975-76 to 1386.2 tones in 1985-86. At current prices it meant an increase from Rs. 3.46 lakh to Rs. 31.73 lakh i.e. 4.7fold increase in quantity and a 9-fold increase in value.

Grain bank: As the production of grain increased for most of farmers in the village, a decision was taken in the “Gram Sabha” whereby the farmers who had excess grain were to voluntarily donate grain to the "Grain Bank" which was started in 1983. Villagers who did not have enough grain could "borrow" grain from this bank. The idea was to ensure that no villager would have to borrow money to meet food requirements. The grain from the "Grain Bank" is given in the form of loan and is monitored by the youth group.

===Restoring the green cover===

Trees are the greatest friend a man can have , they keep environment clean and healthy. They also fulfill the fuel & fodder needs of village. Recognizing this, the villagers undertook a massive tree plantation drive. Almost 3-4 lakh trees were planted and nurtured. "Social fencing" was introduced whereby villagers voluntarily prevented cattle, goats and sheeps from grazing freely. Open grazing was completely banned with a new emphasis on stall-feeding (Kurhad Bandi). The Sarpanch (head of the village council) of Ralegan narrates: "There is a surplus of fuel wood and fodder. We now help neighbouring villages in their time of need." As fodder became available in abundance, the productivity and number of milk animals increased.

===Uprooting alcoholism===