'''Paulicians''' () were a Christian group which flourished between 650 and 872 in Anatolia, Armenia and the Eastern Themes of the Byzantine Empire. 

==History==
The founder of the sect was Constantine, who hailed from Mananalis, a community near Samosata. He studied the Gospels and Epistles, combined dualistic and Christian doctrines, and, upon the basis of the former, vigorously opposed the formalism of the church. 

Regarding himself as called to restore the pure Christianity of Paul, he adopted the name Silvanus (one of Paul’s disciples) and about the year 660 founded his first congregation at Kibossa in Armenia. Twenty-seven years afterwards he was stoned to death by order of the emperor. Simeon, the court official who executed the order, was himself converted and, adopting the name Titus, became Constantine’s successor, but was burned to death (the punishment pronounced upon the Manichaeans) in 690. 

The adherents of the sect fled, with the Armenian Paul at their head, to Episparis. He died in 715, leaving two sons, Gegnaesius (whom he had appointed his successor) and Theodore. The latter, giving out that he had received the Holy Ghost, rose up against Gegnaesius, but was unsuccessful. Gegnaesius was taken to Constantinople, appeared before Leo the Isaurian, was declared innocent of heresy, returned to Episparis, but, fearing danger, went with his adherents to Mananalis. His death (in 745) was the occasion of a division in the sect; Zacharias and Joseph being the leaders of the two parties. The latter had the larger following and was succeeded by Baanies, 775. The sect grew in spite of persecution, receiving additions from the opponents of image-worship.

Baanes was supplanted by Sergius, 801, who was very active for thirty-four years, and received into the number of the saints. His activity was the occasion of renewed persecutions on the part of Leo the Armenian. Obliged to flee, Sergius and his followers settled at Argaum, in that part of Armenia which was under the control of the Saracens. At the death of Sergius, the control of the sect was divided between several leaders. The empress, Theodora, instituted a new persecution, in which a hundred thousand Paulicians in Grecian Armenia are said to have lost their lives. Under Karbeas, who fled with the residue of the sect, two cities, Amara and Tephrica, were built.

His successor, Chrysocheres, devastated many cities; in 867 advanced as far as Ephesus, and took many priests prisoners. In 868 the Emperor Basil dispatched Petrus Siculus to arrange for their exchange. His sojourn of nine months among the Paulicians gave him an opportunity to collect many facts, which he preserved in his ''History of the empty and vain heresy of the Manichæans, otherwise called Paulicians''. The propositions of peace were not accepted, the war was renewed, and Chrysocheres killed. The power of the Paulicians was broken.

In 970 the emperor, John Tzimisces, transferred some of them to Philippopolis in Thrace, and, as a reward for their promise to keep back the Scythians, granted them religious freedom. This was the beginning of a revival of the sect; but it was true to the empire. Several thousand went in the army of Alexius Comnenus against the Norman, Robert Guiscard; but, deserting the emperor, many of them (1085) were thrown into prison. Efforts were again put forth for their conversion; and for the converts the new city of Alexiopolis was built, opposite Philippopolis. When the Crusaders took Constantinople (1204), they found some Paulicians, whom the historian Gottfried of Villehardouin calls Popelicans. According to a Greek writer Constantine, adherents of the ancient sect were living in Philippopolis in the early part of this century.

In modern times, Paulicians are found in several areas of the world: eastern Europe, Turkey, and rural areas of the southeastern United States.

==Doctrines==
Little is known of the tenets of the Paulicians, as we are confined for information to the reports of opponents and a few fragments of Sergius' letters which they have preserved. Their system was dualistic. In it there are two principles, two kingdoms. The Evil Spirit is the author of, and lord of, the present visible world; the Good Spirit, of the future world. Of their views about the creation of man, little is known but what is contained in the ambiguous words of Sergius. This passage seems to teach that Adam's sin of disobedience was a blessing in disguise, and that a greater sin than his is the sin against the Church. 

'''Павликиане''' (предположительно от имени апостола Павла) - участники одного из наиболее значительных по размаху и последствиям еретических движений. Зародилось в VII в. в Армении, а в VIII - IX вв. получило широкое распространение в Малой Азии и в европейских владениях Византийской империи. Основное ядро движения составляли крестьяне и частично городские низы, хотя последователи павликиан были в разных слоях общества. духовенства, отвергали церковную иерархию, требовали упрощения церковных обрядов. Павликиане не признавали таинства крещения и причастия, почитания Девы Марии и святых, поклонения кресту и иконам, требовали восстановления равенства раннехристианских общин, которое они понимали не только как равенство перед Богом, но и как социальное равенство. 

В 20-е гг. IX в. византийское правительство приняло против еретиков жёсткие меры - за приверженность к ереси грозила смертная казнь. Спасаясь от преследований, павликиане бежали в Арабский халифат и основали свою колонию близ Митилены. После подавления восстания Фомы Славянина к ним присоединились остатки армии повстанцев. В 40-х гг IX в. павликиане построили на берегу Евфрата в Западной Армении крепость ''Тефрику'', ставшую их столицей. Павликиане удалось временно создать независимое от Византии и Арабского халифата объединение, куда стекались беглые крестьяне и городская беднота. Отсюда они совершали успешные набеги на Византию. Только после ряда походов в 872 г. императору Византии Василию I удалось захватить Тефрику и разгромить павликиан.

Категория:Средние века
Категория:Византия
Категория:Ереси
Категория:Гностические секты