The '''Politics of North Korea''' take place within a nominally democratic multi-party framework; in practice, North Korea functions as a dominant-party state. It is widely considered to be a totalitarian dictatorship<ref name=fh></ref> and the Economist Intelligence Unit, while admitting that "there is no consensus on how to measure democracy" and that "definitions of democracy are contested", lists North Korea in last place as the most authoritarian regime in its index of democracy assessing 167 countries. <ref>{{cite web
|url = http://www.economist.com/media/pdf/DEMOCRACY_TABLE_2007_v3.pdf |title=Economist Intelligence Unit democracy index 2006 |accessdate=2007-10-09 |year=2007 |format=PDF |publisher=language=English}}</ref> North Korea's political system is built upon the principle of [[centralization. While the constitution guarantees the protection of human rights and democratic government, most power is within the hands of a ruling elite dominated by Kim Jong-il, the de facto leader of the country. 

The ruling party is the independence in 1948. Two minor political parties exist but are legally bound to accept the ruling role of the WPK.<ref name=wikisource/> Elections occur only in single-candidate races where the candidate has been selected by the WPK beforehand. Kim Il-sung served as General Secretary and President of North Korea from 1948 until his death in July 1994. He was given the posthumous title of Eternal President, symbolizing that he forever holds the position of President, which is formally vacant. Most analysts believe the title a product of the cult of personality he cultivated during his life. The government is highly controlling and severely limits freedom of expression and participation of its citizens in government (see Human rights in North Korea).

North Korea is widely considered a Communist state in the Western world, but the government has formally replaced references to Marxism-Leninism in its constitution with the locally developed concept of Juche, or self-reliance. The constitution of North Korea declares that "the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea shall, by carrying out a thorough cultural revolution, train all the people to be builders of socialism and communism".<ref name=wikisource/> Most of its policies resemble those of Communist regimes before the fall of the Soviet Union. 

The status of the military has been enhanced and it appears to occupy the centre of the North Korean political system; all the social sectors are forced to follow the military spirit and adopt military methods. Kim Jong Il’s public activity focuses heavily on on-the-spot guidance of places and events related to the military. The enhanced status of the military and military-centred political system was confirmed at the first session of the 10th National Defense Commission (NDC) members in the official power hierarchy. All ten NDC members were ranked within the top twenty on September 5, and all but one occupied the top twenty at the fiftieth anniversary of National Foundation Day on September 9.

== National Defence Commission ==

According to the Constitution of North Korea, "the National Defence Commission is the highest military leadership body of State power...the Chairman of the National Defence Commission of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea commands and directs all the armed forces and guides national defence as a whole."<ref name=wikisource/> The position of Chairman of the National Defence Commission has been declared the "highest office of state" and has the "highest administrative authority" according to decrees issued by the Supreme People's Assembly. Few people correctly anticipated that Kim Jong Il would officially terminate the transitional period by resuming the chairmanship of the National Defense Commission (NDC) and abolishing the post of president. Under the 1998 constitution, the NDC’s role and status was strengthened. The 1998 constitution defines the NDC as “the highest guiding organ of the military and the managing organ of military matters.” The chairman of the NDC controls the armed forces. In a speech endorsing Kim Jong Il as NDC chairman, Kim Young Nam made it clear that chairman of the NDC is the highest position in the country, in charge of all matters regarding the country’s politics, economy, and military. Thus Kim Jong Il is in substance head of the state, but theoretically the chairman of the SPA Presidium represents the state and is responsible for foreign affairs, such as reception.

== Government ==

The Cabinet of North Korea consists of the Premier, Vice Premiers, and Ministers of the government. Their terms of office are concurrent with the Supreme People's Assembly. The Premier is the head of the cabinet. The cabinet exercises theoretical control over the executive ministries and has the authority to issue decrees concerning administration of the government, although in reality the government also takes its directions from Kim Jong-il. The current cabinet consists of: 

* Premier: Kim Yong-il<ref name='KoreaHerald2007-10-04'></ref>
* Foreign Minister: Paek Nam-sun
** Vice Foreign Minister: Kim Kye Gwan
** Vice Foreign Minister: Choe Su-hon
* Minister of State Construction Control: Pae Tal-jun
** President of the Central Bank of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea: Kim Wan Su
* Minister of Public Security: General Chu Sang Song
** Deputy Director: Paek Hak-rim
* Minister of People's Armed Forces: Vice Marshal Kim Il-Chol<ref name='KoreaHerald2007-10-04'/>

== Parliament ==
According to the constitution, the legislative Supreme People's Assembly (SPA) is the highest organ of state power. It consists of 687 members, who are elected every five years. The Assembly usually holds only two meetings annually, each lasting a few days; this is the shortest meeting time of any parliament. A standing committee known as the rubberstamp body, due to the short period of its sessions, uncontested elections to office, and the fact that it passes all proposals submitted by the government over a period of a few days.<ref name=fh/>

In theory, North Korea's judiciary is accountable to the SPA and the Presidium.<ref name=wikisource/> The SPA's standing committee also appoints judges to the highest court for 5-year terms that are concurrent with those of the Assembly.

==Party-Government Relations==

The relationship between the party organ and the administrative organ is often compared to the relationship between the man who steers the boat and the man who rows the boat. Party workers in the back should steer so that administrative and economic workers can stay on the party track. Article 11 of the new constitution repeats that “the DPRK shall conduct all activities under the leadership of the KWP.” Although relations between the party and the government have experienced both continuity and change, the party has maintained a guiding role over the government. In the near future, continuity rather than change in party-government relations is more likely to be the case. First, North Korean leaders attribute the demise of the socialist bloc in Eastern Europe to the failure of ideology. Thus, they emphasize the importance of ideology, which is led by the party. They also focus on the significance of popular support of the party. Second, Kim Jong il started his career as a party cadre and his succession to power took
place within the structure of the party. Moreover, most of his strong supporters are in the party and the party at large is his most loyal supporter.
Third, North Korea’s hesitation to implement a policy aimed at integration into the international community makes one expect that the status of the party vis-à-vis that of the government will be strengthened. Although North Korea is very concerned with the opening policy, its economic policy is dictated by political considerations. North Korea’s opening policy is implemented in a very limited way because of the fear of the side effects opening may bring. Thus the role of government technocrats is clearly limited, and it is not feasible to see the government outside the control of the party. Although the government gained in status under the new constitution, this does not seem to affect the guiding role of
the party over the government. Particularly in the area of organization and ideology, party guidance may be firmer.

==Party-Military relations==

The party traditionally has controlled the military in North Korea since the Korean War, when North Korea began to dispatch political officials to the military. In October 1950, party committees began to be organized within the military. The party organs within the military were strengthened after two incidents in 1956 and 1969 that resulted in a wide-scale purge of factions opposed to Kim Il Sung. According to the Party Act (article 46) adopted in 1980, “KPA is the revolutionary armed forces of the KWP.” Some believe, however, that the military-centered political system of recent years may be damaging the party’s control over the military. Kim Jong Il has treated the military better than ever by frequently visiting events and places associated with it and by promoting military officials in the official power hierarchy.

לפי החוקה של קוריאה הצפונית, המדינה מוגדרת כ-"דמוקרטיה עממית", כלומר היא דמוקרטיה שהשלטון בה נמצא בידי נציגי העם. בפועל כל הכוח מרוכז בידי מספר מצומצם של אנשי אליטה ובראשם קים ז'ונג איל. קוריאה הצפונית היא אחת המדינות המגבילות ביותר בעולם וזכויות אדם בסיסיות ביותר נרמסות מידי יום ביומו (עפ"י הערכה עשרות עד מאות אלפים כלואים במחנות עבודה עם תנאים קשים). התקשורת כולה מגוייסת להאדרת הישגי המדינה והעם והאדרת דמותו של קים ז'ונג איל ושל אביו לפניו, קים איל סונג. במדינה מספר גופים שלטוניים ובראשם הוועדת הלאומית להגנה, אספת העם העליונה, הממשלה, ומפלגת הפועלים הקוריאנית. ככל הנראה לצבא השפעה מכרעת על ההחלטות שמתקבלות בקרב חוגי השלטון.

===התפתחויות פוליטיות===
מאז ה-9 בספטמבר 1948, תאריך ההקמה הרשמי של הרפובליקה הדמוקרטית העממית של קוריאה, תפוס רסן השלטון על ידי מפלגת הפועלים הקוריאנית. כמזכיר הכללי של המפלגה נבחר באותה תקופה קים איל סונג, ובנוסף שימש גם בתפקיד ראש הממשלה. לאחר מלחמת קוריאה ערך קים איל סונג טיהורים שנועדו להסיר קיני התנגדות לשלטון. מסוף שנות ה-50 החל קים איל סונג לפתח סביבו פולחן אישיות אדיר ממדים שהשתווה לזה של סטלין ומאו צה טונג, המתבטא בין השאר בסרטים המפוקים אודותיו, פסליו מעטרים מקומות רבים בערי קוריאה הצפונית, הופקו עליו ספרים רבים ולומדים עליו רבות במוסדות החינוך. כמו כן כיכרות, רחובות ומבנים ציבוריים רבים נקראים על שמו. מאמצע שנות השבעים נוצר מושג חדש וזהו "מרכז המפלגה". לבסוף התברר שמרכז המפלגה מתייחס לבנו, קים ז'ונג איל. בוועידה העשירית של מפלגת הפועלים הקוריאנית בשנערכה באוקטובר 1980 התברר כי ככל הנראה הוא היורש של אביו. לאורך שנות ה-80 נכנס יותר ויותר לענייני ניהול המדינה. 
בשנת 1992 בוצע תיקון בחוקה, לפיו מוקם גוף בשם וועדת ההגנה הלאומית ובראשו עומד מאז קים ג'ונג איל. לאחר מות אביו, עבר השלטון אליו והוא ממשיך עד היום את מדיניות הדיכוי והפולחן אישיות של אביו. אף עפ"י שבאמצע שנות ב-90 חוותה המדינה משבר כלכלי חמור ורבים ציפו שהמשטר יקרוס, מצב זה לא קרה ונראה כי כל עוד לא יהיו זעזועים רציניים מבפנים או מבחוץ לא יהיה שינוי רציני בצורת השלטון בשנים הקרובות.

===סונגאן- קדימות הצבא=== 
סונגאן (בקוריאנית קדימות הצבא) היא אידאולוגיה אותה הגה קים ז'ונג איל וזו חלק מהמדיניות הנוכחית של השלטון. לפי אידאולוגיה זו, על מנת להגן על המדינה מפני אויבים פנימיים וזרים, על המדינה להשקיעה משאבים רבים בהגנה, בעדיפות עליונה. זו אחת הסיבות, שעל אף המשבר הכלכלי החמור שפקד את קוריאה הצפונית בשנות ה-90 וגרם למותם של רבים לא צומצמה ההוצאה על צבא.