thumb|240px|right|''Clairvoyants state that they perceive in the human aura symbols they may believe to correspond to memories, dreams, archetypes, ancestors, past lives and shades of colour corresponding to emotions: these are often referred to as "astral".''

The '''Astral body''' is a planetary heavens of astrology. The term was adopted by  nineteenth-century Theosophists and neo-Rosicrucians. 

The idea is rooted in common worldwide religious accounts of the afterlife<ref>Suki Miller, ''After Death: How People around the World Map the Journey after Death'' (1995).</ref> in which the soul's journey or "ascent" is described in such terms as "an ecstatic.., mystical or out-of body experience, wherein the spiritual traveller leaves the physical body and travels in his/her subtle body (or dreambody or astral body) into ‘higher’ realms".<ref>Dr. Roger J. Woolger, ''Beyond Death: Transition and the Afterlife'', accessed online June 2008 at the website of the Royal College of Psychiatrists, http://www.rcpsych.ac.uk/PDF/RWoolgerTransition.pdf.</ref> Hence "the "many kinds of 'heavens', 'hells' and purgatorial existences believed in by followers of innumerable religions" may also be understood as astral phenomena, as may the various "phenomena of the séance room".<ref>Powell, op.cit.</ref> The phenomenon of apparitional experience is therefore related, as is made explicit in Cicero's Dream of Scipio.

The astral body is sometimes said to be visible as an out-of-the-body experience or ''superseded, being rooted in an attribution of materiality and dimensionality to the psychic world.

==History==

===The classical world===

Neoplatonism is a branch of classical philosophy that uses the works of Plato as a guide to understanding religion and the world. In the Myth of Er, particularly, Plato rendered an account of the afterlife which involved a journey through seven planetary spheres and then eventual reincarnation. He taught that man was composed of mortal body, immortal reason and an intermediate "spirit".<ref>Plato, ''The Republic'', trans. Desmond Lee, Harmondsworth.</ref>

Neoplatonists agreed as to the immortality of the rational Dodds, E.R. ''Proclus: The Elements of Theology''. A revised text with translation, introduction, and commentary, 2nd edition 1963, Appendix.</ref> 

The word "astral" means "of the stars", thus the astrological phenomenon:  "The whole of the astral portion of our earth and of the physical planets, together with the purely astral planets of our System, make up collectively the astral body of the Solar Logos". There are "seven types of astral matter" by means of which "psychic changes occur periodically".<ref>Powell, ''op. cit.'' page 9.</ref>

===The modern era===

Such ideas greatly influenced mediaeval religious thought and are visible in the Renaissance medicine of romantic era, alongside the discovery of electromagnetism and the nervous system, there came a new interest in the spirit world. Franz Anton Mesmer spoke of the stars, animal magnetism and magnetic fluids. In 1801 the English occultist Francis Barrett wrote of a herb's "excellent astral and magnetic powers" - for herbalists had categorised herbs according to their supposed correspondence with the seven planetary influences.

In the mid-nineteenth century the French occultist Eliphas Levi wrote much of "the astral light", a factor he considered of key importance to magic, alongside the power of will and the doctrine of correspondences. He considered the astral light the medium of all light, energy and movement, describing it in terms that recall both Mesmer and the luminiferous ether.<ref>Chic Cicero, Chic C, Sandra Tabatha Cicero The Essential Golden Dawn, Llewellyn Worldwide, 2003.</ref>

Levi's idea of the astral was to have much influence in the English-speaking world through the teachings of The Golden Dawn, but it was also taken up by Helena Blavatsky and discussed in the key work of Theosophy, The Secret Doctrine. Levi seems to have been regarded by later Theosophists as the immediate source from which the term was adopted into their sevenfold schema of planes and bodies, though there was slight confusion as to the term's proper use.

===Theosophy===

Blavatsky aligned the term "astral body" with the Indian ''linga sharira'' which is  one of the seven principles of human life according to her, and the astral light with the Akashic Record, a kind of cosmic memory. According to the Theosophical founder William Q. Judge the astral world is also analogous to the world of ghosts. Judge wrote; "There are many names for the Astral Body. Here are a few: Linga Sarira, Sanskrit, meaning design body, and the best one of all; ethereal double; phantom; wraith; apparition; doppelganger; personal man; perisprit; irrational soul; animal soul; Bhuta; elementary; spook; devil; demon. Some of these apply only to the astral body when devoid of the corpus after death." <ref>William Judge, ''The Ocean of Theosophy'' 2nd Ed. TPH, 1893, Chapter 5, book online June 2008 at http://www.theosociety.org/pasadena/ocean/oce-hp.htm</ref> 

However C.W. Leadbeater and Adyar School of Theosophy), and following them, Alice Bailey, equated it with Blavatsky's ''Kama'' (desire) principle and called it the ''Emotional body'' a concept not found in earlier Theosophy. ''Astral body'', ''desire body'', and ''emotional body'' became synonymous, and this identification is found in much later theosophically-inspired thought. The astral body in later Theosophy is "the vehicle of feelings and emotions" through which "it is possible...to experience all varieties of desire". We have a "life in the astral body, whilst the physical body is wrapped in slumber". So the astral body "provides a simple explanation of the mechanism of many phenomena revealed by modern psycho-analysis".<ref>Powell, ''op. cit.'' Ch.1 ''passim''.</ref> To this extent, then, the "astral body" is a reification of the dream-world self.

'''Kâma Rupa''' (em rosacrucianas, um dos princípios da constituição humana.

Na teosofia é usado indistintamente ''Kâma Rupa'' e ''corpo de desejos'' para denotar o 4º princípio na constituição setenária do Homem. Kâma Rupa é a sede da mente (a mente humana, inferior), a parte da constituição do Homem que contém as energias mentais e psíquicas.

Deve-se notar que na literatura teósofica original (como a escrita por C. W. Leadbeater). Nas obras de Blavatsky o corpo astral não se refere ao corpo emocional mas ao duplo etérico Linga Sharira. Contudo mais tarde C.W. Leadbeater e Annie Besant (Adyar School of Theosophy), e a seguir a eles, Alice Bailey, equacionaram o astral com o princípio ''Kama'' (desejo) e designaram-no por ''corpo emocional'' (um conceito não encontrado na Teosofia anterior).

Na literatura rosacruciana de Fraternidade Rosacruz, aceitam uma constituição tríplice do Homem, e neste caso o chamam de ''corpo de desejos''. Assim, diz-se que o homem é um Espírito tríplice, possuindo uma mente que governa o tríplice corpo. Assim, o Espírito Divino emana de si o ''corpo denso'' extraindo como alimento a Alma consciente; o Espírito de Vida emana de si o ''corpo vital'', extraindo como alimento a Alma intelectual; e finalmente, o Espírito Humano emana de si o ''corpo de desejos'', extraindo como alimento a Alma Emocional. 

Segundo estes mesmos rosacruzes, diz-se que o corpo de desejos tem uma densidade ainda inferior à do corpo denso, sendo preso a este por meio do fígado. Após a morte, este corpo adquire a mesma forma do corpo denso durante a vida terrestre e permanece vivo por cerca de dois terços do tempo em que o indivíduo tenha vivido no mundo físico.

Além disto, outras correntes rosacruzes, como é o caso da Fraternitas Rosicruciana Antiqua, preferem propor uma constituição humana formada por três princípios: Corpo, alma e espírito. Interessante observar que esta constituição tríplice do Homem também é aceita pela Igreja Católica.