''This article is about the island. For the album by Arkona, see Vozrozhdeniye.''

thumb|225px|Vozrozhdeniya Island from space, November 1994
thumb|225px|Vozrozhdeniya Island topographic map, 1984

'''Vozrozhdeniya Island''', also known as '''Rebirth Island''' (Uzbek ''Tiklanish orollari''; Russian Остров Возрождения), is a former island, now a peninsula, in the Aral Sea.  It became a peninsula in 2002, due to ongoing shrinkage of the Aral Sea. [http://visibleearth.nasa.gov/view_rec.php?id=4343] It is now shared by Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan.

Located in the central Aral Sea, Vozrozhdeniya Island was one of the main laboratories and testing sites for the bacilli were weaponized and stored. The main town on the island was Kantubek, which lies in ruins today, but once had approximately 1,500 inhabitants.

The laboratory staff members abandoned the island in late 1991. Many of the containers holding the spores were not properly stored or destroyed, and over the last decade many of the containers have developed leaks. As the Aral Sea continues to recede, the area will eventually connect further with the surrounding land. Many scientists fear that animals <!-- reptiles, including snakes, [neither is a vector for either bubonic plage or anthrax] --> will move to the surrounding land and eventually carry these deadly biological agents out.

Brian Hayes, a biochemical engineer with the United States Department of Defense's Defense Threat Reduction Agency, led an expedition in the spring and summer of 2002 to neutralize what was likely the world's largest anthrax dumping grounds. His team of 113 people neutralized between 100 and 200 tons of anthrax over a three-month period. The cost of the cleanup operation was approximately $5 million. 

thumb|220px|L'isola di Vozroždenie vista dallo spazio, Novembre 1994
thumb|225px|L'isola di Vozroždenie, mappa topografica, 1984L''''isola di Vozroždenie''', altresì conosciuta come uzbeco Tiklanish orollari; in russo Остров Возрождения), è un'ex isola, ora una penisola, nel lago d'Aral. È diventata una penisola nel 2002, a causa del progressivo ritiro delle acque del lago. Attualmente è divisa tra il Kazakistan e l'Uzbekistan.

Fino alla laboratori sovietici per effettuare test di armi biologiche venne stabilito qui. Dichiarazioni sulla pericolosità dell'isola vennero fatte da disertori sovietici, incluso spore di bacilli di peste bubbonica furono trasformati in armi e immaganizzate. Il principale insediamento nell'isola era Kantubek, oggigiorno in rovina, che una volta aveva una popolazione di circa 1.500 abitanti.

I membri dello staff del laboratorio abbandonarono l'isola nel tardo animali presenti nei dintorni potessero addentrarsi nell'impianto ed entrare in contatto con gli agenti contaminanti e disperderli nell'ambiente con gravissimo rischio di epidemie mortali.