Le '''principe de non-agression''', avec le concept de libertarianisme, ainsi exposé dans le ''Manifeste libertarien'' :

::Le credo libertarien repose sur un axiome central : '''aucun individu ni groupe d’individus n’a le droit d’agresser quelqu’un en portant atteinte à sa personne ou à sa propriété'''. On peut appeler cela « axiome de non-agression », « agression » étant défini comme ''prendre l’initiative d’utiliser la violence physique (ou de menacer de l’utiliser) à l’encontre d’une autre personne ou de sa propriété''. Agression est donc synonyme d’invasion, d’intrusion.

::Si personne n’a le droit d’agresser quelqu’un d’autre, en bref, si chacun a le droit absolu d’être « libre » de toute agression, il s’ensuit immédiatement que le libertarien approuve pleinement ce qu’on appelle généralement les « libertés civiles » : liberté d’expression, de publication, d’association, liberté de « commettre » des délits sans victimes tels que la pornographie, les « déviations » sexuelles, la prostitution, la drogue, toutes choses que le libertarien ne considère pas du tout comme des délits, puisqu’il ne s’agit pas d’agression à l’encontre d’une autre personne ou de sa propriété. En outre, il considère la conscription comme un esclavage à grande échelle. Et puisque la guerre, et plus particulièrement la guerre moderne, entraîne l’exécution massive de civils, le libertarien considère de tels conflits comme du meurtre de masse, et donc comme quelque chose d’absolument illégitime.

::Tous ces points de vue sont considérés comme « de gauche » sur l’échelle idéologique contemporaine. D’autre part, le libertarien s’opposant à l’agression contre le droit de propriété privée, il s’oppose tout aussi vigoureusement à l’intrusion du gouvernement dans les droits de propriété et dans l’économie de marché au travers de contrôles, réglementations, subventions ou interdictions. Car si chaque individu a le droit de posséder et de ne pas être agressé et volé, alors il a aussi le droit de se défaire de sa propriété (par la transmission ou l’héritage) et de l’échanger contre la propriété d’autres personnes (liberté de contrat et économie de marché libre) sans subir d’intrusion. Le libertarien est donc en faveur d’un droit de propriété sans restriction et du libre-échange, c’est-à-dire d’un système capitalistique de laissez-faire.

::Le libertarien ne voit aucune incohérence à être « de gauche » dans certains domaines et « de droite » dans d’autres. Au contraire, il considère que sa position est virtuellement la seule qui soit cohérente du point de vue de la liberté individuelle.

The '''non-aggression principle''' (also called the '''non-aggression axiom''', '''anticoercion principle''', or '''zero aggression principle''') is a consequentialist libertarians do not base their libertarianism on it<ref>[http://www.libertyunbound.com/archive/2005_01/editors-right.html What's Right vs. What Works]. Charles Murray, David Friedman, David Boaz, and R.W. Bradford. ''Liberty''. January 2005, Vol 15, No 1</ref>), is an conservatives, traditionalists and natural law theory.  The principle of non-aggression exists in various forms in the faith traditions of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam as well as Eastern philosophies such as Confucianism. It holds that "aggression," which is defined as the ''initiation'' of physical force, the threat of such, or fraud upon persons or their property, is inherently illegitimate. The principle does not preclude defense against aggression.

The non-aggression principle typically includes property as a part of the owner; to aggress against someone's property is to aggress against the individual.  Thus, the principle leads to the rejection of theft, vandalism, murder and fraud.  When applied to governments, it has been taken to prohibit many policies including taxation and the military draft. When taken to the logical conclusion, individualist anarchists argue that it calls for abolition of the state itself and protecting individuals from aggression through voluntary payments rather than taxation.

The libertarian thought, though not all libertarians agree.  The principle has been derived by various philosophical approaches, including Objectivism.  Murray Rothbard derived the principle from self-ownership.  Ayn Rand derived it from the right to life. However, some espouse the principle as a simple matter of personal preference.

==Historical background==
A form of the non-aggression principle can be traced back to Epicurus, who wrote, "The justice of nature is a pledge of reciprocal usefulness, neither to harm one another nor be harmed."

Historically, the non-aggression principle supersedes an earlier formulation by Herbert Spencer, called the law of equal freedom: "Every man is free to do that which he wills, provided he infringes not the equal freedom of any other man."  This notion of equal freedom goes back to earlier liberal thought.  For example, Mary Wollstonecraft, in "Vindication of the Rights of Men" (1790), wrote, "The birthright of man ... is such a degree of liberty, civil and religious, as is compatible with the liberty of every other individual with whom he is united in a social compact, and the continued existence of that compact."[http://oll.libertyfund.org/Home3/Book.php?recordID=0532]

Nevertheless, there are precursors of the NAP. In ''On the Duty of Man and Citizen'' (1682) Samuel von Pufendorf wrote, "Among the absolute duties, i.e., of anybody to anybody, the first place belongs to this one: let no one injure another. For this is the broadest of all duties, embracing all men as such."[http://www.constitution.org/puf/puf-dut_106.htm]. The Islamic theologians Abu Mansur Al Maturidi, Ibn Qayyim Al-Jawziyya and the philosopher Averroes wrote that man could rationally know that man had a right to life and property.  Natural law theorist Murray Rothbard traces the non-aggression principle to natural law theorist St. Thomas Aquinas and the early Thomist scholastics of the Salamanca school[http://www.lewrockwell.com/rothbard/rothbard135.html].  In ''Second Treatise on Government'' John Locke is the most well known Enlightenment classical liberal to exposit the non-aggression principle.  Locke, according to some modern scholars, was influenced by Islamic philosopher Ibn Tufayl who in Hayy ibn Yaqzan discussed the life story of a baby living alone without prior knowledge who discovered natural law, and natural rights, which obliged man not to coerce against another's life or property.  Ibn Tufayl influenced Locke's notion of Tabula Rasa<ref>G. A. Russell (1994), ''The 'Arabick' Interest of the Natural Philosophers in Seventeenth-Century England'', pp. 224-239, Brill Publishers, ISBN 9004094598.</ref>.  Locke wrote, "Being all equal and independent, no one ought to harm another in his life, health, liberty, or possessions."[http://oregonstate.edu/instruct/phl302/texts/locke/locke2/locke2nd-a.html#Sect.%206.] Thomas Jefferson wrote, "Rightful liberty is unobstructed action according to our will within limits drawn around us by the equal rights of others. I do not add ‘within the limits of the law’, because law is often but the tyrant’s will, and always so when it violates the rights of the individual." and "No man has a natural right to commit aggression on the equal rights of another, and this is all from which the laws ought to restrain him." Another formulation pertaining to government (as opposed to individual conduct) was John Stuart Mill's harm principle, which states that "the only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised over any member of a civilized community, against his will, is to prevent harm to others". 

Early formulations that use terms such as "harm" or "injury," such as those of Epicurus and Mill above, are today generally considered imprecise. "Harm" and "injury" are too subjective; one man's harm may be another man's benefit. For example, a squatter may make "improvements" that the owner considers detrimental. Modern formulations avoid such subjectivity by formulating the NAP in terms of individual rights or observable conduct (''initiation of force/violence'').

==Formulations==
Probably the earliest formulation of the NAP was made by Ayn Rand. In an essay called "Man's Rights" in the book "The Virtue of Selfishness" (1961) she wrote, "The precondition of a civilized society is the barring of physical force from social relationships. ... In a civilized society, force may be used only in retaliation and only against those who initiate its use."[http://www.ccsindia.org/ccsindia/lssreader/2lssreader.pdf] Note that she stipulated the context - civilized society. Later, Murray Rothbard echoed, "No one may threaten or commit violence ('aggress') against another man's person or property. Violence may be employed only against the man who commits such violence; that is, only defensively against the aggressive violence of another. In short, no violence may be employed against a nonaggressor. Here is the fundamental rule from which can be deduced the entire corpus of libertarian theory."<ref>Murray N. Rothbard, The Myth of National Defense</ref> L. Neil Smith, the libertarian science fiction writer, claims, "No one has the right, under any circumstances, to initiate force against another human being, nor to delegate its initiation." This is considered an imprecise formulation, since it explicitly ignores context. Walter Block phrases it in legal terms, saying, "It shall be legal for anyone to do anything he wants, provided only that he not initiate (or threaten) violence against the person or legitimately owned property of another."[http://www.lewrockwell.com/block/block26.html] This formulation underlines that the NAP applies to crime and legality, and is not a general moral principle without exceptions. E.g. If physical survival is at issue ("lifeboat" situations), it may not be applicable.

==Criticism==
The non-aggression principle faces three kinds of criticism: the first holds that the principle is immoral, the second argues that it is impossible to apply consistently in practice, while the third holds that the interpretation of the principle is too ambiguous to be useful. Some common criticisms fail due to lack of relevance. For example, some claim that the NAP implies that if a child continually runs across your land to retrieve his or her ball, would it be justifiable to shoot the child with a gun. This is clearly a red herring since the NAP only implies that the child should not do so - it says nothing about proper rectificatory actions or punishment if a violation occurs. In fact, virtually all supporters of the NAP, following e.g. Hugo Grotius, believe that any response to violation should be proportionate to the injury done. No known supporter of NAP would advocate shooting such a child.

===Consequentialist criticism===
This moral criticism is based on consequentialist ethics, usually utilitarianism. It holds that the non-aggression principle is unethical because it opposes the initiation of force even when the results of such initiation would be better than the results of any other course of action. Suppose, for instance, that you could save a million lives by killing one man. The non-aggression principle holds that you should not kill that man. But this leads to a million deaths. Granted, such extreme situations are unlikely, but opponents of the non-aggression principle argue that milder forms of the same dilemma (for example the choice between taking away part of a wealthy man's property or allowing a poor person to starve) are very common. Of course, many formulations, such as Rothbard's and Block's, avoid this objection by either specifying that the NAP only applies to a civilized context (and not 'lifeboat situations') or that it applies only to legal rights (as opposed to general morality.) Thus a starving man may, in consonance with general morality, break into a hunting cabin and steal food, but nevertheless he is aggressing, i.e. violating the NAP, and (by most rectification theories) should pay compensation.

Some consequentialists libertarians promote the non-aggression principle by basing its advocacy on forms consequentialism such as rule utilitarianism and rule egoism. These utilitarians do not believe that it is immoral to engage in aggression, but because they believe situations where aggression would lead to the best consequences are rare, they promote the non-aggression principle with the justification that if others accept it as a rule of then it would lead to better consequences than if they did not accepted it as a rule. They believe the consequences of advocating the rule are superior to advocating that other individuals attempt to calculate each of their own actions to determine whether aggression or non-aggression would lead to better consequences. Other consequentialist libertarians do not promote the non-aggression principle at all; they simply believe that allowing a very large scope of political and economic liberty results in the maximum well-being or efficiency for a society, even if securing this liberty involves some governmental actions that would be considered violations of the non-aggression principle. It just so happens that these actions are limited in the free society they envision. This type of libertarianism is associated with Milton Friedman, Ludwig von Mises, and Friedrich Hayek.<ref>Barry, Norman P. Review Article:The New Liberalism. B.J. Pol. S. 13, p. 93</ref>

===Inconsistency criticism===
The second type of criticism focuses on the difficulty of determining who exactly ''initiated'' force in many real-life conflicts. As a general rule, each side in a conflict claims that the other "started it". Sometimes it is plainly clear who initiated force - for example, when a thief steals a person's wallet. Other times, however, the situation is more complicated. For example, one side may have been the first to ''threaten'' force and the other side may have been the first to actually ''use'' force, or the conflict began such a long time in the past that no one remembers who started it. Wars are a particularly difficult case, because very few of them begin with a country openly declaring that it wants to initiate force on another. The 2003 invasion of Iraq is a useful example, especially since it is a source of disagreement among libertarians. Some claim that the US government initiated force on Iraq, while others claim that the US government merely retaliated against a dictator who violated the terms of a peace agreement established at the end of the Gulf War, and initiated force on his people.

Libertarians usually respond by stating that such pragmatic issues are well dealt with already in today's legal systems. For instance, an example of a dissipative game is a situation where a person starts insulting another in a bar, the other person responds by shoving, the other throws a punch, and the situation dissipates into a fight. In such cases, both parties are simply guilty of aggressing on the other because the aggression clearly went beyond self defense.

A version of this second criticism is often upheld by libertarian socialists and others, who point out that almost every patch of land on Earth was stolen (i.e. obtained through initiation of force) at some point in its history. The stolen land was later inherited or sold until it reached its present owners. Thus, property over land and natural resources is based on the initiation of force. Among those who make this argument, some (such as followers of Henry George) claim that private property over natural resources is unique in being based on the initiation of force, while others hold that, by extension, private property over ''all'' goods derives from violence, because natural resources are required in the production of all goods.

Libertarians often reply to the "who started it?" problem by contending that the difficulty in determining who is the transgressor should not dissuade us from engaging in that process.