'''Cael Norman Sanderson''' (born Salt Lake City, American wrestler and current head wrestling coach at Iowa State. A Olympic champion, he also went undefeated in four years of college wrestling (159-0), including four consecutive NCAA titles (1999-2002) and was the first NCAA wrestler to go undefeated with more than 100 wins. Sports Illustrated named his college career as the No. 2 most outstanding achievement in college history. <!-- citation needed. Also, what was #1? -->He was also the 2003 World Championship silver medalist, and a three-time national freestyle champion (2001-03). 
Cael was the third of four Sanderson brothers to win high school state wrestling titles in Utah while wrestling for Wasatch High School in Heber City, Utah. Sanderson had a 127-3 record with four state titles. He was coached by his father Steve. He was also an All-Region selection in football.

After graduation from Wasatch High in redshirted the 98 season. The following season, Sanderson won all 39 matches and the NCAA title at 184 pounds. He became the first freshman in NCAA tournament history to be named the NCAA Wrestling Team Championship's most outstanding wrestler.

Sanderson continued to have success in 1999-2000. He completed the season 40-0 with another NCAA title. He also won the Dan Hodge Trophy as the nation's most outstanding college wrestler. He was the first underclassman to win the Hodge Trophy. In the off season, he won the World University title in Tokyo, Japan.

As a junior, Sanderson went 40-0, raising his record to 119-0. He broke Dan Gable's record of 100 consecutive wins. He was also named outstanding wrestler in the NCAA tournament and was the first two-time winner of the Dan Hodge Trophy.

Sanderson's 02 campaign was a coronation of sorts. He again went undefeated at 40-0, becoming the first NCAA wrestler to go undefeated with more than 100 wins. He became the first wrestler to win the NCAA title in four consecutive years. He also won his third Dan Hodge Trophy as outstanding wrestler. Sanderson set the school record with 159 wins. His success brought attention even from non-wrestling fans.  Sanderson was the first wrestler featured on Wheaties cereal boxes for his achievement. His final college accomplishments were a record of 159-0, 4 NCAA titles, 3 Dan Hodge Trophy awards, 4-time NCAA Outstanding Wrestler, and 4-time Big 12 Champion.

After his graduation, Sanderson worked with the wrestling team at Iowa State while training for the 2004 Olympic Games in Athens, Greece. Sanderson won gold at 84 kg (185 lb) at the 2004 Olympics, defeating Eui Jae Moon of South Korea in the finals.

'''Cael Norman Sanderson''' (* US-amerikanischer Ringer.

== Werdegang ==

Cael Sanderson begann an der Wasatch High School in Heber, Utah, zusammen mit seinen drei Brüdern mit dem Ringen. Er wurde dort von seinem Vater Steve trainiert. 1997 begann er ein Studium an der Iowa State University und wurde ein sehr erfolgreicher Freistilringer im Hochschulbereich. Er gewann mehrere NCAA-(amerik. Hochschul-Sportverband) Championships auf Staatenebene und auf Bundesebene. Sein Rekord bei diesen Kämpfen war 159:0.

Auf der internationalen Ringermatte gab er bei den Junioren-Weltmeisterschaften (Cadets) 1994 in Frankfort (Illinois) mit dem Gewinn einer Bronzemedaille in der Klasse bis 55 kg Körpergewicht seinen Einstand. Als Senior war er erstmals bei den Universitäts-Weltmeisterschaften 2000 in Tokio am Start und wurde im Mittelgewicht vor dem Iraner Majid Khodaie Studentenweltmeister.

In den nächsten Jahren wurde er, inzwischen auch Mitglied der Sunkist Kids, einem der besten US-amerikanischen Ringsportvereine, von Trainer Bobby Douglas gezielt auf die Olympischen Spiele 1984 vorbereitet. Bereits im Jahr 2003 zeigte es sich, dass dieses Vorhaben gelingen könnte, denn Cael wurde in diesem Jahr Vizeweltmeister im Mittelgewicht hinter Shazid Shazidow aus Russland.

Bei den Olympischen Spielen 2004 in Athen schaffte Cael mit Siegen über Magomed Kurugliew, Kasachstan, Sergej Borchenko, Weißrussland, Majid Khodaie, Iran, Yoel Romero Palacio, Kuba und einem 3:1 über Moon Eui-Jae aus Südkorea den Olympiasieg in der Mittelgewichtsklasse.

Nach den Olympischen Spielen 2004 trat Cael Sanderson die Nachfolge von Bobby Douglas als Cheftrainer an der Iowa State University an.