thumb|right|250px|Carta europea delle variazioni di temperatura rispetto la norma durante la canicola del [[2003 ]]
La '''canìcola''' rappresenta il periodo del maggiore caldo estivo; in particolare il caldo afoso e opprimente delle ore centrali della giornata, caratterizzato da alti valori di temperatura e umidità e assenza di vento.

Il nome deriva dal latino ''Canicula'' ("piccolo cane"), ovvero la stella più luminosa (Sirio) della costellazione del Cane Maggiore, che sorge e tramonta con il Sole (levata eliaca) dal 24 luglio  al 26 agosto (il periodo appunto della "canìcola"). Il nome della costellazione deriva probabilmente dagli antichi Egizi, in quanto avvertiva (come un cane vigile) l'arrivo del periodo delle inondazioni del Nilo.

Nel medioevo essa iniziava il malariche. Il caldo canicolare influenzava, sempre secondo le credenze medievale, anche la riuscita di alcune ricette tecniche, per cui era il periodo propizio per procurasi alcuni ingredienti e lavorarli adeguatamente per ottenere particolari sostanze.

The phrase '''Dog Days''' or "'''the dog days of summer'''", refers to the hottest, most sultry days of summer. They are a phenomenon of the northern hemisphere that usually falls between early July and early September but the actual dates vary greatly from region to region, depending on latitude and climate.  Dog Days can also define a time period or event that is very hot or stagnant, or marked by dull lack of progress. 

==The name==
The term "Dog Days" was used by the Greeks (see, e.g., Aristotle's Physics, 199a2), as well as the ancient Romans (who called these days ''caniculares dies'' (days of the dogs)) after Sirius (the "Dog Star"), the brightest star in the heavens besides the Sun. 

Popularly believed to be an evil time "when the seas boiled, wine turned sour, dogs grew mad, and all creatures became languid, causing to man burning fevers, hysterics, and phrensies" - Brady’s ''Clavis Calendarium,'' 1813. 

The Dog Days originally were the days when Sirius, the Dog Star, rose just before or at the same time as sunrise (heliacal rising), which is no longer true owing to precession of the equinoxes. The ancients sacrificed a brown dog at the beginning of the Dog Days to appease the rage of Sirius, believing that that star was the cause of the hot, sultry weather.

==The dates==
''The Old Farmer's Almanac'' lists the traditional timing of the Dog Days as the 40 days beginning July 3 and ending August 11, coinciding with the ancient heliacal (at sunrise) rising of the Dog Star, Sirius. 

According to ''The Book of Common Prayer'' (1552), the "Dog Daies" begin on July 6 and end on August 17.

==Other locations==
By contrast, "Dog Days" as defined herein do not occur at all in the southern hemisphere, for there even when the star is least favorably placed for viewing (around July 1), it still will be briefly visible from the southern hemisphere both in the east before dawn and again in the west after dusk. Throughout most of Antarctica Sirius is circumpolar; that is to say, constantly above the horizon.

In the northern hemisphere, the further north one goes, the longer Sirius remains invisible each year, and beyond a latitude of approximately 74°N (to the north of any part of mainland Europe or North America) the star never appears above the horizon at all.

The period is called "Rötmånad" in Sweden and "Mätäkuu" in Finland, both literally meaning "rotting-month", due to the risk of foodstuff spoiling due to the high temperature.