"Етиопида" () е изгубена древногръцка епическа поема. Тя е част от Епическия цикъл. Историята, разказана в нея хронологически следва Омировата Илиада, а след нея се нарежда Малка Илиада. Етиопида понякога е приписвана от древните автори (Прокъл) на Арктин. Поемата съдържала 5 песни, написани в дактилен хекзаметър. Тя обхваща събитията през десетата година на войната, след погребението на Хектор до убийството на Ахил. 

По всяка вероятност е създадена през 7 век пр.н.е., но това не е доказано. Древни източници посочват, че Арктин е живял през 8 век пр.н.е., но най-ранните художествени изобразявания на един от най-важните персонажи в нея, Пентесилея, става около 600 пр.н.е., което предполага една доста по-късна дата на написване. 

The '''Aethiopis''' or '''Aithiopis''' (Greek: , ) is a lost epic of ancient Arctinus of Miletus (see Cyclic poets). The poem comprised five books of verse in dactylic hexameter.

==Date==

The ''Aethiopis'' was probably composed in the seventh century BC, but there is much uncertainty. Ancient sources date Arctinus to the eighth century; but the earliest artistic representations of one of the most important characters, Penthesilea, date to about 600 BC, suggesting a much later date.

==Content==

In current critical editions only five lines survive of the ''Aethiopis''' original text. We are almost entirely dependent on a summary of the Cyclic epics contained in the ''Chrestomathy'' attributed to an unknown "Proclus" (possibly to be identified with the 2nd-century AD grammarian Eutychius Proclus). Fewer than ten other references give indications of the poem's storyline.

The poem opens, shortly after the death of the Trojan hero Amazon warrior Penthesileia who has come to support the Trojans. She has a moment of glory in battle, but Achilles kills her. The Greek warrior Thersites later taunts Achilles, claiming that he had been in love with her, and Achilles kills him too. Achilles is ritually purified for the murder of Thersites.

Next another Trojan ally arrives, Memnon, son of Ethiopian contingent and wearing armour made by the god Paris, assisted by the god Ajax and Odysseus.

The Greeks hold a funeral for Antilochus. Achilles' mother, the sea nymph Thetis, comes with her sisters and the Muses to lament over Achilles' body. Funeral games are held in honour of Achilles, at which Achilles' arms are offered as a prize for the greatest hero; and there develops a dispute over them between Ajax and Odysseus. There the ''Aethiopis'' ends; it is uncertain whether the judgment of Achilles' arms, and subsequent suicide of Ajax, were told in the ''Aethiopis'', in the next epic in the Cycle, the ''Little Iliad'', or in both.