thumb|Plaque commemorating Nicolas Perrot, Clergue Park, [[Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario]]

'''Nicolas Perrot''' (1644 - 1717), explorer, diplomat, and fur trader, was one of the first white men in the upper Mississippi Valley.  Born in France, he came to New France around 1660 with Jesuits and had the opportunity to visit Indian tribes and learn their languages.  He formed a fur trading company around 1667 and undertook expeditions to various tribes and land in and around present-day Wisconsin.  He was sometimes the first white man seen by the native peoples and was generally well received.

In 1670 he was an interpreter for Daumont de Saint-Lusson, a French commissary assigned to the country of the Ottawas, Amikwas, Illinois, and other Indian natives to be discovered in the direction of Lake Superior.  He continued to travel around these areas and engaged in fur trading, giving the natives such items as cooking kettles and hatchets (to replace stone tools).  In 1671 he married Madeleine Raclot.  He was given a land grant on the river Saint-Michel in present-day Quebec, and the 1681 census showed him having six children.

He continued to be involved in Indian affairs.  In 1684 he succeeded in bringing the warriors of several nations to Niagara to meet with the Governor's army, where a peace treaty was signed.  In the spring of 1685 he was appointed Commandant-in-Chief of Bais Des Puants (present day Green Bay, Wisconsin) and the neighboring regions when war broke out between the Fox tribe and the Sioux and Chippewa tribes.  He worked hard to bring about peace, and was successful, at least for a time.  After this, Perrot traveled to the northern waters of the Mississippi River, in the territory of the Sioux, where he built Fort Saint-Antoine.

In the spring of 1687 he was in the region of Onondaga chief Otreouti, who promised the neutrality of the Onondagas, Cayugas, and Oneidas.  In 1689 he built Fort Saint-Pierre at the mouth of the Miami chiefs.

In 1695 Perrot brought the Miami, Fox chiefs to Montreal at the governor’s request, regarding war with the Iroquois.  Perrot returned west where his concern was to maintain unity and peace among them in their efforts against the Iroquois.  However there was danger, and on two occasions he was almost sent to be burned at the stake with the Mascoutins and the Miami tribe. 

Perrot then settled on his land grant at Bécancour.  The Indian chiefs whom he had known saw him for the last time in 1701 at a peace treaty signed in Montreal. He still served as interpreter, but this period of his life was marked by financial difficulties and harassment from creditors.  He asked the authorities for a compensation he said was due to him, and a pension in consideration of services long provided, but was not satisfied.  He was involved in court cases involving lawsuits filed by and against him.  He also wrote his memoirs, which became valuable to later historians.

thumb|Plaque commémorant Nicolas Perrot à Clergue Park, [[Sault Saint Marie (Ontario)]]

'''Nicholas Perrot''' (1644 - 1717), explorateur, diplomate et commerçant en fourrures, fut l'un des premiers européens dans la haute vallée du Mississippi.  Né en Darcey en Bourgogne, et de Marie Sivot.

==Arrivée en Nouvelle-France==
Il arrive en Nouvelle-France aux environs de 1660 en compagnie de Jésuites avec qui il aura l'occasion de visiter des tribus indiennes et d'apprendre leurs langues. Il crée une compagnie de traite des fourrures vers 1667 et entreprend des expéditions vers ce qui est aujourd'hui le Wisconsin. Il fut souvent le premier européen que rencontraient les indigènes et sera en général bien accueilli.

Il est l'auteur de l'ouvrage '''Mémoires sur les mœurs, coutumes et religion des sauvages de l'Amérique septentrionale'''.

On le rappelle en 1701 pour servir d'interprète lors de la conclusion du traité de paix à Montréal ("la Grande paix de Montréal").

Malgré son commerce de fourrure, il perd presque tous ses acquis suite à des dettes accumulées et meurt pauvre.