'''Bob Avakian''' (maoísta dos Estados Unidos, o Partido Comunista Revolucionario.

Neto de emigrantes armenios que viñeran ós Estados Unidos para traballar no campo, educouse en Berkeley, California. O seu pai era xuíz do Condado de Alameda. Na Universidade de California en Berkeley entrou en contacto con grupos da esquerda e participou en protestas estundantís que dirixía Mario Savio para obrigar a Universidade a recoñecer a liberdade de expresión. Avakian converteuse no voceiro na área de San Francisco do Partido Paz e Liberdade mentres apoiaba activamente os Panteras Negras. En 1975 participou na creación do PCR. Cando Deng Xiaoping visitou os Estados Unidos, Avakian dirixiu as protestas en Washington contra a visita. Por enfrontamentos coa policía na protesta, ele e os outros membros do seu grupo foi xulgados e condenados a un total de 241 anos de cárcere. Para evitar ir a prisión marchou a París en 1981. No entanto, todas as acusaciones contra ele foram completamente retiradas, en 1982. [http://www.boston.com/bostonglobe/ideas/articles/2008/01/27/free_bob_avakian?mode=PF]

==Obras==

'''Bob Avakian''' is Chairman of the Revolutionary Communist Party, USA, which he has led since its formation in 1975. He is a veteran of the Free Speech Movement and the Left of the 1960s and early 1970s, and was closely associated with the Black Panther Party. He has continually published writing on Marxism for 25 years.

==Life==
Avakian was born on Armenian immigrants who settled in Fresno, football player for his high school. His father was Spurgeon "Sparky" Avakian (1913-2002), an Alameda County judge in University of California at Berkeley, where he became involved in radical politics. He participated in the Peace and Freedom Party, and an active supporter of the Black Panthers.

Bob Avakian was active in Students for a Democratic Society and was a leading figure in the Marxist-Leninist collectives coming out of the SDS. It became the Revolutionary Union.

Bob Avakian and the Revolutionary Communist Party in 1975. When Deng Xiaoping went to the United States to visit Jimmy Carter, the RCP led protests at sites throughout Washington, D.C. Avakian and other participants in the march became engaged in a conflict with the police. Avakian and others arrested for the incident were charged with several counts of assault on a police officer. After a court granted Avakian and the other arrestees' request to be charged and tried together, the total punishment exposure (the most severe possible sentence) for the seventeen defendants was over 241 years (''U. S. v. Schiller'', 424 A.2d 51 [D.C., 1980]). As a result, Avakian went to France in 1981. All charges against him were dropped in 1982[http://www.boston.com/bostonglobe/ideas/articles/2008/01/27/free_bob_avakian?mode=PF].

Bob Avakian's current whereabouts are kept secret. His last appearances caught on video were two speaking engagements (on the East and West Coasts of the United States). These were recorded for the DVD ''REVOLUTION: Why It's Necessary, Why It's Possible, What It's All About''. The recordings were the first publicly available images of Avakian since 1981.

==Views==
Bob Avakian is an outspoken atheist and proclaims that humanity needs "liberation without gods". He is a proponent of Marxism-Leninism-Maoism. 

As chairman of the RCP, and as a writer, Avakian supports the Leninist concept of the vanguard party as a necessary leading component of a revolutionary movement. The role of the vanguard party, as explained by Avakian, continues once regime change has been effected, as class struggle continues under socialism (as it did in the Soviet Union and China, where Avakian argues that "capitalist roaders" within the communist parties themselves "restored" capitalism under state auspices). In Maoist literature, these are widely agreed upon ideas developed from Mao's fight against the "Modern Revisionism" of the former Soviet Union, and within the Communist Party of China, as expressed in Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution.

He has argued against the idea that "spontaneous" rebellion will achieve political revolution without leadership bodies based on a dialectical materialist methodology and practical unity of action. This and other positions he has held have tended toward Avakian something of a polarizing figure among activists of a more "movementist" politics. 

Avakian holds that while the United States contains "oppressed nations," a disputed idea in the communist movement, that the working class's struggle is of a "multi-national proletariat" for political power, not a series of separated, concurrent "issues." He sees the main strategic orientation as uniting the fight of that multi-national proletariat with the revolutionary struggle of oppressed nationalities, African-Americans and Chicanos in particular. Avakian and the RCP oppose identity politics as an incorrect "post-modern" and anti-Marxist idea, that there are separate and discrete "truths" particular to who holds them. 

Avakian argues that the Democratic Party is not the party of the people, but serves one sector of the capitalist ruling class. He believes in the necessity of  a communist party to lead a total regime change based on the uprising of millions, within the United States and around the world. 

Avakian holds that "there is nothing sacred" about the current national borders, particularly since they were formed by a process of conquest and dispossession. The economic and state development of different societies must entail different forms of struggle accordingly. 