'''Chalford''' is a small village in the Frome Valley of the Stroud. At this point the valley is also called the Golden Valley—and has been ever since Queen Victoria rode the Great Western through the valley and called it so. The parish covers  of this Cotswold countryside.  

== History ==
The remains, and known sites, of many barrows indicate that the plateau area of Chalford Hill, Saxon or Danish in origin.

The name Chalford may be derived from ''Calf'' (Way) ''Ford'', or possibly from the Saxon ''cealj'' or ''Chalk'' and the Norman ''Ford'': both possibilities have the same meaning. Chalford Hill is a recent title for the western end of the hill: Its original name was Chalford Lynch. "Lynch" (Anglo-Saxon ''hlinc''.</ref> means a cultivated terrace following the contours of a hill.  "France" is much more difficult to explain: some say it is derived from ''Frams-eye'' (island) or ''–ea'' (stream) from the Fram (Frome) river in the valley, and thence perhaps via ''Francey'' to ''France''. Others say it refers to the 17th century woollen cloth and silk.

Chalford was one of the centres for the manufacture of clothiers built many of the houses on the hill. 

Chalford is noted for two fine Arts and Crafts movement churches. Christ Church (Church of England) contains work by Norman Jewson, William Simmonds, Peter Waals, Edward Barnsley, Norman Bucknell, amongst other distinguished artists and craftsmen working in the Cotswold tradition. The Church of Our Lady of the Angels (Roman Catholic), Brownshill, by W. D. Caroe (1930), contains outstanding stained glass by Douglas Strachan.

In February 2008, Chalford hit the headlines when a community plan to reintroduce donkeys as a way of carrying shopping up the steep, narrow hills became public.

Chalford known as participant to the Bisley Chalford games held every two years held in alternating villages. The competition, which has been running since the 90's,was originally started by a group of school children from the rival schools, has now been turned into a properly hosted tournament.

'''Chalford''' ist eine kleine britische Ortschaft, im Herzen Englands, in der sogenannten Queen Victoria hier mal entlangritt, und ihn so bezeichnete.

== Lage & Fläche ==

Der Landkreis (''in diesem Fall Parish genannt''), umfasst in der Cotswolds Region eine Fläche von ungefähr 5,2 km².

== Geschichte ==

Die Überreste und verschiedene historische Stätten von Hügelgräbern, weisen darauf hin, dass die Hochebenen von Chalford Hill, France Lynch und Bussage, eine Gegend war, die schon seit über 5000 Jahren ständig besiedelt war. Feuersteine aus der Steinzeit wurden ebenso ausgegraben, wie auch Überreste einer Römischen Villa.

Oft deuten die Bezeichnungen von Plätzen oder Gegenden auf sächsischen oder dänischen Ursprungs hin.

Der Name Chalford ist wohl eine Fusion zweier Sprachen und leitet sich wahrscheinlich durch die sächsischen Wörter ''cealj'' oder ''Chalk'' sowie dem normannischen Wort ''Ford'' ab. Diese Wörter haben insofern die gleiche Bedeutung. Chalford Hill ist eine rezente Bezeichnung für die westliche Seite des Hügels, die ursprüngliche lautete jedoch Chalford Lynch.