thumb|300px|World map with [[List of countries with nuclear weapons|nuclear weapons development status represented by color. 

]]

'''Nuclear proliferation''' is a term now used to describe the spread of states. 

Three nations, none of which signed or ratified the NPT, have acquired, or are presumed to have acquired, nuclear weapons:  India, Pakistan and Israel.  Critics of the NPT and nuclear weapon States cite this when they charge that the NPT-system is discriminatory.

== History of Nuclear Proliferation ==

Earnest international efforts to promote '''nuclear non-proliferation''' began soon after World War II, when the Truman Administration proposed the  Arms Control, Deterrence and Nuclear Proliferation | Historical Documents | atomicarchive.com<!-- Bot generated title -->]</ref> of 1946, named after Bernard Baruch, America's first representative to the United Nations Atomic Energy Commission.  The Baruch Plan, which drew heavily from the [[Acheson-Lilienthal Report of 1946, proposed the verifiable dismantlement and destruction of the U.S. nuclear arsenal (which, at that time, was the only nuclear arsenal in the world) after all governments had cooperated successfully to accomplish two things:  (1) the establishment of an "international atomic development authority," which would actually own and control all military-applicable nuclear materials and activities, and (2) the creation of a system of automatic sanctions, which not even the U.N. Security Council could veto, and which would proportionately punish states attempting to acquire the capability to make nuclear weapons or fissile material.  

Although the Baruch Plan enjoyed wide international support, it failed to emerge from the UNAEC because the Soviet Union planned to veto it in the Security Council.  Still, it remained official American policy until 1953, when President Eisenhower made his "Atoms for Peace" proposal before the U.N. General Assembly.  Eisenhower's proposal led eventually to the creation of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in 1957. Under the "Atoms for Peace" program thousands of scientists from around the world were educated in nuclear science and then dispatched them home, where many later pursued secret weapons programs in their home country.<ref ></ref>

Efforts to conclude an international agreement to limit the spread of nuclear weapons did not begin until the early 1960s, after four nations (i.e., the U.S., Soviet Union, Britain and France) had acquired nuclear weapons (see List of countries with nuclear weapons for more information).  Although these efforts stalled in the early 1960s, they renewed once again in 1964, after the People's Republic of China detonated a nuclear weapon and became the fifth nation to have acquired nuclear weapons.  In 1968, governments represented at the Eighteen Nation Disarmament Committee (ENDC) finished negotiations on the text of the NPT.  In June 1968, the U.N. General Assembly endorsed the NPT with General Assembly Resolution 2373 (XXII), and in July 1968, the NPT opened for signature in Washington, DC, London and Moscow.  The NPT entered into force in March 1970.

Since the mid-1970s, the primary focus of nonproliferation efforts has been to maintain, and even increase, international control over the fissile material and specialized technologies necessary to build such devices because these are the most difficult and expensive parts of a nuclear weapons program.  The main materials whose generation and distribution is controlled are highly enriched uranium and plutonium.  Other than the acquisition of these special materials, the scientific and technical means for weapons construction to develop rudimentary, but working, nuclear explosive devices are considered to be within the reach of industrialized nations.

Since its founding by the United Nations in 1957, the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has promoted two, sometimes contradictory, missions:  on the one hand, the Agency seeks to promote and spread internationally the use of civilian nuclear energy; on the other hand, it seeks to prevent, or at least detect, the diversion of civilian nuclear energy to nuclear weapons, nuclear explosive devices or purposes unknown.  The IAEA now operates a safeguards system as specified under Article III of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) of 1968, which aims to ensure that civil stocks of uranium, plutonium, as well as facilities and technologies associated with these nuclear materials, are used only for peaceful purposes and do not contribute in any way to proliferation or nuclear weapons programs.

== Dual use technology ==
Dual use technology refers to the possibility of military use of civilian nuclear power technology. The enriched uranium used in most nuclear reactors is not concentrated enough to build a bomb. Most nuclear reactors run on 4% enriched uranium; Little Boy used 80% enriched uranium; while lower enrichment levels could be used, the minimum bomb size would rapidly become unfeasibly large as the level was decreased. However, the same plants and technology used to enrich uranium for power generation can be used to make the highly enriched uranium needed to build a bomb.<ref name="wss-stsoet"></ref>

In addition, the plutonium produced in power reactors, if separated from spent fuel through chemical reprocessing (much less technically challenging than isotopic separation), can be used for a bomb. While the plutonium resulting from normal reactor fueling cycles is less than ideal for weapons use because of the concentration of Pu-240, a usable weapon can be produced from it.<ref name="npec-afeotpdolwr"></ref> If the reactor is operated on very short fueling cycles, bomb-grade plutonium can be produced.  However, such operation would be virtually impossible to camouflage in many reactor designs, as the frequent shutdowns for refueling would be obvious, for instance in satellite photographs.  

Fast breeder reactors require reprocessing, generate more plutonium than they consume (and much than non-breeders), and can produce better than weapons-grade plutonium.  New technology for breeder reactors, like SSTAR, may lessen the risk of nuclear proliferation by providing sealed reactors with a limited self-contained fuel supply that could be remotely shut down in case of tampering.

==International cooperation==
===Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty===

At present, 189 countries are States Parties to the ''Treaty on the Nonproliferation of Nuclear Weapons'', more commonly known as the UK, and the USA. 

Notable non-signatories to the NPT are Israel, Pakistan, and India (the latter two have since tested nuclear weapons, while Israel is considered by most to be an unacknowledged nuclear weapons state).  North Korea was once a signatory but withdrew in January 2003.  The legality of North Korea's withdrawal is debatable but as of October 9, 2006, North Korea clearly possesses the capability to make a nuclear explosive device.

===International Atomic Energy Agency===

The IAEA was set up by unanimous resolution of the United Nations in 1957 to help nations develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. Allied to this role is the administration of safeguards arrangements to provide assurance to the international community that individual countries are honoring their commitments under the treaty.

The IAEA regularly inspects civil nuclear facilities to verify the accuracy of documentation supplied to it. The agency checks inventories, and samples and analyzes materials. Safeguards are designed to deter diversion of nuclear material by increasing the risk of early detection. They are complemented by controls on the export of sensitive technology from countries such as UK and USA through voluntary bodies such as the Nuclear Suppliers Group.  The main concern of the IAEA is that uranium not be enriched beyond what is necessary for commercial civil plants, and that plutonium which is produced by nuclear reactors not be refined into a form that would be suitable for bomb production.

===Scope of safeguards===
Traditional safeguards are arrangements to account for and control the use of nuclear materials. This verification is a key element in the international system which ensures that uranium in particular is used only for peaceful purposes. 

Parties to the NPT agree to accept technical safeguard measures applied by the IAEA. These require that operators of nuclear facilities maintain and declare detailed accounting records of all movements and transactions involving nuclear material. Over 550 facilities and several hundred other locations are subject to regular inspection, and their records and the nuclear material being audited. Inspections by the IAEA are complemented by other measures such as surveillance cameras and instrumentation. 

The inspections act as an alert system providing a warning of the possible diversion of nuclear material from peaceful activities. The system relies on; 

#Material Accountancy - tracking all inward and outward transfers and the flow of materials in any nuclear facility. This includes sampling and analysis of nuclear material, on-site inspections, and review and verification of operating records. 
#Physical Security - restricting access to nuclear materials at the site.
#Containment and Surveillance - use of seals, automatic cameras and other instruments to detect unreported movement or tampering with nuclear materials, as well as spot checks on-site. 
All NPT non-weapons states must accept these full-scope safeguards. In the five weapons states plus the non-NPT states (India, Pakistan and Israel), facility-specific safeguards apply. IAEA inspectors regularly visit these facilities to verify completeness and accuracy of records. 

The terms of the NPT cannot be enforced by the IAEA itself, nor can nations be forced to sign the treaty. In reality, as shown in Iraq and North Korea, safeguards can be backed up by diplomatic, political and economic measures. 

While traditional safeguards easily verified the correctness of formal declarations by suspect states, in the 1990s attention turned to what might not have been declared. While accepting safeguards at declared facilities, Iraq had set up elaborate equipment elsewhere in an attempt to enrich uranium to weapons grade. North Korea attempted to use research reactors (not commercial electricity-generating reactors) and a reprocessing plant to produce some weapons-grade plutonium. 

The weakness of the NPT regime lay in the fact that no obvious diversion of material was involved. The uranium used as fuel probably came from indigenous sources, and the nuclear facilities were built by the countries themselves without being declared or placed under safeguards. Iraq, as an NPT party, was obliged to declare all facilities but did not do so. Nevertheless, the activities were detected and brought under control using international diplomacy. In Iraq, a military defeat assisted this process. 

In North Korea, the activities concerned took place before the conclusion of its NPT safeguards agreement. With North Korea, the promised provision of commercial power reactors appeared to resolve the situation for a time, but it later withdrew from the NPT and declared it had nuclear weapons.

===Additional Protocol===
In 1993 a program was initiated to strengthen and extend the classical safeguards system, and a model protocol was agreed by the IAEA Board of Governors 1997. The measures boosted the IAEA's ability to detect undeclared nuclear activities, including those with no connection to the civil fuel cycle. 

Innovations were of two kinds. Some could be implemented on the basis of IAEA's existing legal authority through safeguards agreements and inspections. Others required further legal authority to be conferred through an Additional Protocol. This must be agreed by each non-weapons state with IAEA, as a supplement to any existing comprehensive safeguards agreement. Weapons states have agreed to accept the principles of the model additional protocol. 

Key elements of the model Additional Protocol:

*The IAEA is to be given considerably more information on nuclear and nuclear-related activities, including R & D, production of uranium and thorium (regardless of whether it is traded), and nuclear-related imports and exports. 
*IAEA inspectors will have greater rights of access. This will include any suspect location, it can be at short notice (e.g., two hours), and the IAEA can deploy environmental sampling and remote monitoring techniques to detect illicit activities. 
*States must streamline administrative procedures so that IAEA inspectors get automatic visa renewal and can communicate more readily with IAEA headquarters.
*Further evolution of safeguards is towards evaluation of each state, taking account of its particular situation and the kind of nuclear materials it has. This will involve greater judgement on the part of IAEA and the development of effective methodologies which reassure NPT States.

As of January 2006, 86 countries have brought Additional Protocols into force.  The IAEA is also applying the measures of the Additional Protocol in Taiwan, China.<ref>[http://www.iaea.org/OurWork/SV/Safeguards/sg_protocol.html Additional Protocols to Nuclear Safeguards Agreements]</ref>

===Limitations of Safeguards===
The greatest risk from nuclear weapons proliferation comes from countries which have not joined the NPT and which have significant unsafeguarded nuclear activities; India, Pakistan, and Israel fall within this category. While safeguards apply to some of their activities, others remain beyond scrutiny.

A further concern is that countries may develop various sensitive IAEA to the UN Security Council, just as if it were in breach of its safeguards agreement. Trade sanctions would then be likely.

IAEA safeguards, together with bilateral safeguards applied under the NPT can, and do, ensure that uranium supplied by countries such as Australia and Canada does not contribute to nuclear weapons proliferation. In fact, the worldwide application of those safeguards and the substantial world trade in uranium for nuclear electricity make the proliferation of nuclear weapons much less likely.

The Additional Protocol, once it is widely in force, will provide credible assurance that there are no undeclared nuclear materials or activities in the states concerned. This will be a major step forward in preventing nuclear proliferation.

===Other IAEA developments===
The USA, the former USSR, the UK, France, Germany, Canada and Japan -- but now includes 35 countries.

According to Kenneth D. Bergeron's ''Tritium on Ice: The Dangerous New Alliance of Nuclear Weapons and Nuclear Power'', tritium is not classified as a 'special nuclear material' but rather as a 'by-product'.  It is seen as an important litmus test on the seriousness of the United State's intention to nuclear disarm. This radioactive super-heavy hydrogen isotope is used to boost the efficiency of fissile materials in nuclear weapons. The United States resumed tritium production in 2003 for the first time in 15 years. This could indicate that there is a potential nuclear arm stockpile replacement since the isotope naturally decays.

In May 1995, NPT parties reaffirmed their commitment to a Fissile Materials Cut-off Treaty to prohibit the production of any further fissile material for weapons. This aims to complement the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty of 1996 and to codify commitments made by USA, UK, France and Russia to cease production of weapons material, as well as putting a similar ban on China. This treaty will also put more pressure on Israel, India and Pakistan to agree to international verification.

On August 9, 2005 Ayatollah Ali Khamenei issued a fatwa forbidding the production, stockpiling and use of nuclear weapons. The full text of the fatwa was released in an official statement at the meeting of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in Vienna. [http://www.ww4report.com/node/929] As of February 2006 Iran formally announced that uranium enrichment within their borders has continued.  Iran claims it is for peaceful purposes but the United Kingdom, France, Germany, and the United States claim the purpose is for nuclear weapons research and construction. [http://www.cnn.com/2006/WORLD/meast/03/06/iran.nuclear/index.html]

==Unsanctioned nuclear activity==

===Iraq=== 
Up  to the late 1980s it was generally assumed that any undeclared nuclear activities would have to be based on the diversion of nuclear material from safeguards. States acknowledged the possibility of nuclear activities entirely separate from those covered by safeguards, but it was assumed they would be detected by national intelligence activities. There was no particular effort by IAEA to attempt to detect them.

Iraq had been making efforts to secure a nuclear potential since the 1960s. In the late 1970s a specialised plant, destroyed by Israeli bombers in June 1981.

Not until the 1990 NPT Review Conference did some states raise the possibility of making more use of (for example) provisions for "special inspections" in existing NPT Safeguards Agreements. Special inspections can be undertaken at locations other than those where safeguards routinely apply, if there is reason to believe there may be undeclared material or activities.

After inspections in Iraq following the UN Gulf War cease-fire resolution showed the extent of Iraq's clandestine nuclear weapons program, it became clear that the IAEA would have to broaden the scope of its activities. Iraq was an NPT Party, and had thus agreed to place all its nuclear material under IAEA safeguards. But the inspections revealed that it had been pursuing an extensive clandestine uranium enrichment programme, as well as a nuclear weapons design programme.

The main thrust of Iraq's uranium enrichment program was the development of technology for Hiroshima bomb, but was abandoned soon afterwards.

The Iraqis did the basic research work at their nuclear research establishment at Tuwaitha, near Baghdad, and were building two full-scale facilities at Tarmiya and Ash Sharqat, north of Baghdad. However, when the war broke out, only a few separators had been installed at Tarmiya, and none at Ash Sharqat.

The Iraqis were also very interested in centrifuge enrichment, and had been able to acquire some components including some carbon-fibre rotors, which they were at an early stage of testing.

They were clearly in violation of their NPT and safeguards obligations, and the IAEA Board of Governors ruled to that effect. The UN Security Council then ordered the IAEA to remove, destroy or render harmless Iraq's nuclear weapons capability. This was done by mid 1998, but Iraq then ceased all cooperation with the UN, so the IAEA withdrew from this work.

The revelations from Iraq provided the impetus for a very far-reaching reconsideration of what safeguards are intended to achieve.

''See also: Iraq and weapons of mass destruction''

=== North Korea ===
The Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) acceded to the NPT in USSR.  However, it delayed concluding its NPT Safeguards Agreement with the IAEA, a process which should take only 18 months, until April 1992.

During that period, it brought into operation a small gas-cooled, graphite-moderated, natural-uranium (metal) fuelled "Experimental Power Reactor" of about 25 MWt (5 MWe), based on the UK Magnox design.  While this was a well-suited design to start a wholly indigenous nuclear reactor development, it also exhibited all the features of a small plutonium production reactor for weapons purposes.  North Korea also made substantial progress in the construction of two larger reactors designed on the same principles, a prototype of about 200 MWt (50 MWe), and a full-scale version of about 800 MWt (200 MWe). They made only slow progress; construction halted on both in 1994 and has not resumed. Both reactors have degraded considerably since that time and would take significant efforts to refurbish.

In addition it completed and commissioned a  reprocessing plant that makes the Magnox Yongbyon were to be under safeguards, there was always the risk that at some stage, the DPRK would withdraw from the NPT and use the plutonium for weapons.

One of the first steps in applying NPT safeguards is for the IAEA to verify the initial stocks of uranium and plutonium to ensure that all the nuclear material in the country have been declared for safeguards purposes. While undertaking this work in 1992, IAEA inspectors found discrepancies which indicated that the reprocessing plant had been used more often than the DPRK had declared, which suggested that the DPRK could have weapons-grade plutonium which it had not declared to the IAEA. Information passed to the IAEA by a Member State (as required by the IAEA) supported that suggestion by indicating that the DPRK had two undeclared waste or other storage sites.

In February 1993 the IAEA called on the DPRK to allow special inspections of the two sites so that the initial stocks of nuclear material could be verified. The DPRK refused, and on 12 March announced its intention to withdraw from the NPT (three months' notice is required). In April 1993 the IAEA Board concluded that the DPRK was in non-compliance with its safeguards obligations and reported the matter to the UN Security Council. In June 1993 the DPRK announced that it had "suspended" its withdrawal from the NPT, but subsequently claimed a "special status" with respect to its safeguards obligations. This was rejected by IAEA.

Once the DPRK's non-compliance had been reported to the UN Security Council, the essential part of the IAEA's mission had been completed. Inspections in the DPRK continued, although inspectors were increasingly hampered in what they were permitted to do by the DPRK's claim of a "special status". However, some 8,000 corroding fuel rods associated with the experimental reactor have remained under close surveillance.

Following bilateral negotiations between DPRK and the USA, and the conclusion of the Agreed Framework in October 1994, the IAEA has been given additional responsibilities. The agreement requires a freeze on the operation and construction of the DPRK's plutonium production reactors and their related facilities, and the IAEA is responsible for monitoring the freeze until the facilities are eventually dismantled. The DPRK remains uncooperative with the IAEA verification work and has yet to comply with its safeguards agreement.

While Iraq was defeated in a war, allowing the UN the opportunity to seek out and destroy its nuclear weapons programme as part of the cease-fire conditions, the DPRK was not defeated, nor was it vulnerable to other measures, such as trade sanctions. It can scarcely afford to import anything, and sanctions on vital commodities, such as oil, would either be ineffective, or risk provoking war.

Ultimately, the DPRK was persuaded to stop what appeared to be its nuclear weapons programme in exchange, under the agreed framework, for about US$5 billion in energy-related assistance. This included two 1000 MWe light water nuclear power reactors based on an advanced US System-80 design.

In January 2003 the DPRK withdrew from the NPT. In response a series of discussions between the DPRK, USA, and the PRC, a series of six-party talks (the parties being the DPRK, ROK, PRC, Japan, USA and Russia) were held in Beijing; the first beginning in April 2004 concerning North Korea's weapons program. 

On January 10 2005 North Korea declared that it was in the possession of nuclear weapons.  At the end of 2005 the DPRK has halted all six-party talks concerning its nuclear programme for 13 months due to the US freezing its international financial assets such as those in a bank in Macau.

On October 9 2006 North Korea announced that it has performed its first-ever nuclear weapon test.  On December 18 2006, the six-party talks finally resumed.

''See also: North Korea and weapons of mass destruction and Six-party talks''

===South Africa===
In 1991, South Africa acceded to the NPT, concluded a comprehensive safeguards agreement with the IAEA, and submitted a report on its nuclear material subject to safeguards.  At the time, the state had a nuclear power programme producing nearly 10% of the country's electricity, whereas Iraq and North Korea only had research reactors.

The IAEA's initial verification task was complicated by South Africa's announcement that between 1979 and 1989 it built and then dismantled a number of nuclear weapons. South Africa asked the IAEA to verify the conclusion of its weapons programme.  In 1995 the IAEA declared that it was satisfied all materials were accounted for and the weapons programme had been terminated and dismantled.

South Africa has signed the NPT, and now holds the distinction of being the only known state to have indigenously produced nuclear weapons, and then verifiably dismantled them.<ref name="fas-sanwp"></ref>

===United States-NATO nuclear weapons sharing===
The United States provides about 180 tactical B61 nuclear bombs for use by Belgium, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands and Turkey under a NATO nuclear weapons sharing agreement.
Some states believe this violates Articles I and II of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, where the U.S. has committed:
:"... not to transfer to any recipient whatsoever nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices or control over such weapons or explosive devices directly, or indirectly...".
The U.S. insists its forces control the weapons and that no transfer of the nuclear bombs or control over them is intended "unless and until a decision were made to go to war, at which the [NPT] treaty would no longer be controlling", so there is no breach of the NPT. However the pilots and other staff of the "non-nuclear" NATO countries practice handling and delivering the U.S. nuclear bombs.

right|450px|thumb|<font color="#ed2024">'''Rouge'''</font> : les cinq grandes puissances nucléaires<br /><font color="#F08A00">'''Orange foncé'''</font> : les autres puissances nucléaires déclarés officiellement</li><br /><font color="#FFBC5B">'''Orange clair'''</font> : les États suspectés de posséder l'arme nucléaire<br /><font color="#e368b0">'''Pourpre'''</font> : les États suspectés de faire, ou ayant eu, des recherches sur l'arme nucléaire

La '''prolifération nucléaire''' désigne la propagation de la possession d'armes nucléaires dans le monde. On parle de ''prolifération horizontale'' pour l'augmentation démesurée des armes nucléaires et du nombre de pays détenteurs, et de ''prolifération verticale'' pour le perfectionnement de l’arme nucléaire.

== Historique ==

Depuis l’obtention par les États-Unis de l’arme nucléaire, cette technologie est devenue une préoccupation considérable pour les États. C’est un symbole de puissance et de maîtrise dans le domaine de la science.

Mais les grandes puissances ont réalisé, entre autre suite à de grande crises entre les États-Unis et l’URSS, le danger lié à l’utilisation militaire du nucléaire. C’est afin de limiter la diffusion de la bombe nucléaire que le Traité de non-prolifération nucléaire (TNP) a été conçu en juin 1968, suite à la production d’armes nucléaires par les Soviétiques en 1949, par les Britanniques en 1952, les Français en 1960 et les Chinois en 1964. Signé par les États possédant l'arme nucléaire et une quarantaine d’autres, il est entré en vigueur le 5 mars 1970. Le TNP autorise les 5 États ayant acquis la bombe nucléaire avant 1967 à la conserver mais interdit aux autres de l’obtenir. En revanche, des facilités doivent être offertes aux États désirant avoir des programmes de développement de l’énergie nucléaire à des fins civiles. Il est important de remarquer que le traité comprend aussi une clause de désarmement (article VI), par laquelle les puissances nucléaires s'engagent à des négociations pour un désarmement sous contrôle international.

La quasi-totalité des États font parties du TNP (188 sur 191), mais son contrôle est rendu difficile. Un protocole additionnel existe depuis 1998, et assure une meilleure vérification de l’action des États, mais il n’a été signé que par environ 50 États. Par conséquent, plusieurs États ont tout de même créé des programmes nucléaires interdits, ou menacé de se retirer du traité.  

Dans la pratique, les ''États nucléaires'', qui sont pourtant les 5 membres permanents du conseil de sécurité de l'ONU, ne respectent pas leurs engagements, mais continuent de renouveler et moderniser leurs arsenaux nucléaires<ref>Le missile M51 est une arme nucléaire française [http://www.defense.gouv.fr/dga/layout/set/popup/content/view/full/27999 en cours d'élaboration et de déploiement].</ref> et de faire de la recherche, en contradiction avec les articles 5 et 6 du TNP<ref>
La clause de désarmement du TNP.
</ref>. Ils contribuent ainsi à la prolifération qu'ils alimentent objectivement, en déployant de nouvelles armes, mais aussi subjectivement, car en ne respectant pas eux-mêmes les traités, ils les affaiblissent et justifient de nouveaux contournements. 

De plus, on repproche régulièrement aux ''États nucléaires'' de vendre les technologies du nucléaire civil sachant que, d'une part, lorsque l'on sait enrichir l'uranium à des fins civiles, on a résolu les principales difficultés pour concevoir l'arme atomique, et que d'autre part, une centrale nucléaire produit des "déchets radioactifs" qui seront réutilisables pour faire la bombe.

Par ailleurs, l'ancienne version officielle qui consistait à affirmer que les armes nucléaires constituaient, par leur seule possession, un '''effet purement dissuasif''', s'est convertie. Ainsi, dans les récents discours des Présidents américains et français notamment, on entend aujourd'hui que l'usage de l'arme nucléaire est aussi envisagé dans la protection d'"intérêts vitaux", éventuellement '''de manière préventive'''<ref>
{{Lien web
   |url=http://www.elysee.fr/elysee/francais/interventions/discours_et_declarations/2006/janvier/allocution_du_president_de_la_republique_lors_de_sa_visite_aux_forces_aeriennes_oceanique_et_strategiques-landivisiau-l_ile_longue-finistere.38406.html
   |titre=  Allocution de M. Jacques CHIRAC, Président de la République, lors de sa visite aux forces aériennes et océanique stratégiques.
   |auteur= Jaques Chirac
   |date= 19 janvier 2006
   |citation= Mais ce serait faire preuve d'angélisme que de croire que la '''prévention''', seule, suffit à nous protéger. Pour être entendus, il faut aussi, lorsque c'est nécessaire, être capable de '''faire usage de la force'''. Nous devons donc disposer d'une capacité importante à intervenir en dehors de nos frontières, avec des moyens conventionnels, afin de soutenir et de compléter cette stratégie.

Une telle politique de défense repose sur la certitude que, quoiqu'il arrive, nos intérêts vitaux seront garantis.
'''C'est le rôle attribué à la dissuasion nucléaire qui s'inscrit dans la continuité directe de notre stratégie de prévention. Elle en constitue l'expression ultime'''. 
 }} Ceci est en contradiction avec la [http://www.un.org/french/docs/sc/1995/scr984.htm résolution 984 du Conseil de sécurité des Nations unies] adoptée à l'unanimité le 11 avril 1995 et engageant les pays possédant l'arme nucléaire à ne pas attaquer avec leurs armes atomiques des pays signataires du TNP qui n'en seraient pas dotés.
</ref>.

En outre, la miniaturisation des armes atomiques, ou Mini-nuke terme générique pour les armes nucléaires de trés faible puissance,
permet depuis la fin des années 1950 la fabrication d'armes de courte portée prévues pour être utilisées directement sur le champ de bataille par exemple  d'une part, et d'autre part leur transport dans une simple ''valise diplomatique''. Ce qui laisse entrevoir que non seulement des États mais aussi des organisations parallèles sont susceptibles d'en disposer à court ou moyen terme.

Deux visions s’affrontent au sujet du nucléaire :
* Certains prétendent que l’arme nucléaire est un outil de dissuasion, et a donc un effet stabilisateur. L’exemple classique est le cas du Pakistan et de l’Inde, qui possèdent tous deux l’arme nucléaire et qui ont vu les conflits territoriaux diminuer en intensité.
* Pour d'autres, en revanche, l’arme nucléaire est un élément dangereux et déstabilisateur. En particulier, il permet aux États de moindre importance de faire du chantage en mettant toutes les puissances sur un pied d’égalité. La Corée du Nord est l’illustration de ce chantage, puisqu’elle menace régulièrement de poursuivre son programme nucléaire, dont personne ne connaît l'état d'avancement exact. On avance aussi que la prolifération actuelle transforme la planète en poudrière, de sorte que s'il était à nouveau fait usage de l'arme nucléaire, ou si un accident<ref>Liste des accidents nucléaires</ref> était interprété comme une agression, une guerre nucléaire s'ensuivrait presqu'inévitablement.

Nous avons risqué à plusieurs dizaines reprises une guerre nucléaire, dont quatorze fois un conflit entre les États-Unis et l'Union Soviétique, suite à de fausses alertes, des erreurs humaines ou informatiques entre 1956 et 1962, dont onze incidents durant la phase la plus critique de la crise des missiles de Cuba<ref> [http://www.wagingpeace.org/articles/1998/01/00_phillips_20-mishaps.htm 20 Mishaps that Might Have Started Accidental Nuclear War, Alan F. Phillips, janvier 1998 ]</ref><ref> [http://www-ee.stanford.edu/~hellman/Breakthrough/book/pdfs/borning.pdf Computer System Reliability and Nuclear War, Alan Borning]</ref>.

== Les traités sur la prolifération nucléaire ==