'''M.F.K. Fisher''' (eigentlich '''Mary Frances Kennedy Fisher''', * Albion, amerikanische Essayistin, die sich vor allem mit Themen rund um die Koch- und Tafelkunst auseinandersetzte.

Sie stand in der Tradition von Brillat-Savarin, und ihre 1949 erschienene Übersetzung seines Hauptwerks ''Die Physiologie des Geschmacks'' machte seine Arbeit in den USA und Kanada bekannt.

M.F.K. Fisher lebte Anfang der 30er Jahre für drei Jahre in Frankreich, wo sie von der Lebens- und Esskultur entscheidend geprägt wurde. Nach ihrer Rückkehr in die USA begann sie Essays über die Kochkunst zu veröffentlichen. Ihr erstes Buch ''Serve it Forth'' war so anders als das anderer weiblicher Autorinnen vor ihr, dass viele Kritiker annahmen, es sei von einem Mann geschrieben.

Ihr zu Ehren wird alle zwei Jahre von ''Les Dames d'Escoffier International'' der ''M.F.K. Fisher Award'' verliehen, mit denen Frauen ausgezeichnet werden, die maßgeblichen Einfluss auf die Weiterentwicklung der Kochkunst und Tafelkultur haben.

thumb
'''Mary Frances Kennedy Fisher''' (preparation, natural history, culture, and philosophy. Fisher believed that eating well was just one of the "arts of life" and explored the art of living as a secondary theme in her writing. Her style and pacing are noted elements of her short stories and essays.
==Biography==
Fisher was born ''Mary Frances Kennedy'' in Albion, Episcopal Church. 

While studying at the University of California in 1929, Fisher met her first husband, Alfred Young Fisher.  The couple spent the first formative years of their marriage in Europe, primarily at the University of Dijon in France.  At the time, Dijon was known as one of the major culinary centers of the world and this certainly had an impact on Fisher, who later went on to become one of the great culinary writers of the twentieth century. 

In 1932, the couple returned from France to a country ravaged by the Great Depression. Having lived for years as students on a fixed stipend, they were wholly unprepared for the economic situation that faced them.  Al got odd jobs cleaning out houses before finally landing a teaching job at Occidental College in Los Angeles.  Fisher did her part teaching a few lessons at an all-girls' school and working in a frame shop.  

In addition to being an author, Fisher was an amateur sculptor working mostly in the realm of wood carving. 

During the Fishers' years in California, they formed a friendship with Dillwyn "Timmy" Parrish and his wife, Gigi.  Later, in 1938, Fisher was to leave Alfred for Timmy, referred to as "Chexbres" in many of her books, named after the small Swiss village on Lake Geneva close to where they had lived.  The second marriage, while passionate, was short.  Only a year into the marriage, Parrish lost his leg due to a circulatory disease, and in 1941 took his own life. Fisher went on to be involved in a number of other turbulent romantic relationships with men and women.

Fisher bore two daughters. Anna, whose father Fisher refused to name, was born in 1943. Mary Kennedy was born in 1946, during Fisher's marriage to Donald Friede, which lasted from 1945 to 1951.