'''群狼作戦'''（'''ぐんろうさくせん''', 独: '''Wolfsrudeltaktik'''）とは、BdU) カール・デーニッツ少将（後に海軍総司令官）が考案した複数のUボートが協同して敵輸送船団を攻撃する通商破壊戦術の一つである。'''ウルフ・パック''' (英: '''Wolf Pack''') ともいう。また、'''狼群戦術'''（'''ろうぐんせんじゅつ'''）と呼ぶ場合もある。

== 作戦内容 ==
群狼作戦は複数の潜水艦(3隻以上)により執り行う作戦である。

まず先発の潜水艦か、偵察機から送られてきた情報から進行方向を予測し、予測海域で待ち伏せをし、輸送艦隊が海域に侵入したのを確認したら各艦で包囲陣形を取り、これを殲滅するという方針である。
この方法により、潜水艦の被害は少なくなり、撃沈数は増加した。

また、これは作戦と言うよりも戦術であり、そのため'''群狼戦術'''と翻訳される場合もある。

== アメリカ軍の群狼作戦 ==
潜水艦による連携攻撃はアメリカ海軍も取り入れており、大戦中に日本軍に対して使用している。
しかし、アメリカ軍は潜水艦は3隻と限定し、また、攻撃方法も包囲殲滅よりも波状攻撃が主であった。

The term '''wolf pack''' refers to the mass-attack tactics against German Battle of the Atlantic and submarines of the United States Navy against Japanese shipping in the Pacific Ocean in World War II.

English as "wolf pack" (''Wolfsrudel''), a more accurate metaphoric, but not literal, translation.

U-boat movements were controlled by the ''Befehlshaber der Unterseeboote'' (BdU; English translation: "Commander of Submarines") much more closely than American submarines, which were given tremendous independence once on patrol. Accordingly, U-boats usually patrolled separately, often strung out in co-ordinated lines across likely convoy routes (usually merchants and small vulnerable destroyers), only being ordered to congregate after one located a convoy and alerted the BdU, so a ''Rudel'' consisted of as many U-boats as could reach the scene of the attack. With the exception of the orders given by the BdU, U-Boat commanders could attack as they saw fit. Often the U-Boat commanders were given a probable number of U-Boats that would show up, and then when they were in contact with the convoy, make call signs to see how many had arrived. If the number was sufficient, or if the threat of increased escorts was a possibility, they would attack.

American wolf packs, officially called ''coordinated attack groups'', usually comprised three boats that patrolled in close company and organized before they left port under the command of the senior captain of the three. "Swede" Momsen devised the tactics and led the first American wolf pack from Midway on 1 October, 1943 - , , and .

Although the wolf packs proved a serious threat to Allied shipping, the Allies developed countermeasures to turn the U-boat organization against itself.  Most notably was the fact that wolf packs required extensive radio communication to coordinate the attacks.  This left the U-boats vulnerable to a device called the High Frequency Direction Finder (HF/DF or "Huff-Duff") which allowed Allied naval forces to determine the location of the enemy boats transmitting and attack them.  Also, effective air cover, both long-range planes with radar, and escort carriers and blimps, allowed U-boats to be spotted as they shadowed a convoy (waiting for the cover of night to attack). The destroyers of the Atlantic also used depth charges and other small mines which could be dropped off the ships' side.

Wolf packs fell out of use during the bastions.) However, with the opening shots of the Tomahawk missiles at USS ''Providence'' was the first boat to fire its entire load of missiles and earn the nickname "Big Dog of the Red Sea Wolf Pack."

Recently the name "wolf pack" has been assigned to Iranian missile boat tactis in an hypothetical clash with U.S. Navy;a massive attack of small-size boat armed with missiles and torpedoes on a single (or few) ships in order to overrun or saturate the Aegis 
system;in such attacks even suicide boat could be deployed.   