|thumb|230 px|right|Rodolphe, Prince héritier d'Autriche
'''Rodolphe François Charles Joseph de Habsbourg-Lorraine''' (Rudolf Franz Karl Joseph von Habsburg-Lothringen) (prince héritier de l’Empire austro-hongrois, mort dans des circonstances mystérieuses au pavillon de chasse de Mayerling.

== Biographie ==
=== Naissance et éducation ===
Troisième des quatre enfants et seul fils de l’François-Joseph I d’Autriche et de la duchesse Élisabeth en Bavière, l'archiduc naît le Vienne. Il est prénommé Rodolphe en l'honneur du premier empereur de la dynastie Habsbourg. Dès le lendemain de sa naissance, le jeune prince héritier est proclamé ''Colonel du dix-neuvième régiment d'infanterie'' par son père.

thumb|Rodolphe enfant
thumb|Rodolphe en 1861
Comme ses deux sœurs aînées Sophie (morte avant la naissance de Rodolphe) et Gisèle, le prince héritier est élevé par sa grand-mère paternelle, l’archiduchesse Sophie. Fragile et pas très robuste, c'est un enfant de tempérament craintif. On lui enseigne dès l'âge de trois ans la religion, le tchèque, le hongrois, la lecture et l'écriture, parallèlement à des exercices militaires tels que le tir ou la revue des troupes, l'empereur voulant faire de son fils, en prermier lieu, un soldat !

Dès l'âge de six ans, le petit Rodolphe est séparé de sa sœur bien aimée Gisèle et confié à un impératrice, Gondrecourt est remplacé par le colonel-comte Joseph Latour von Thurmburg (1820-1904), un aide de camp de l'empereur beaucoup plus libéral et qui saura se faire aimer de son élève.

Rodolphe souffre des absences de sa mère qui court le monde, des défaites de l'Autriche face à la Prusse (1866), de la création de la double-monarchie (1867), de l'amour exclusif de sa mère pour sa dernière-née (Marie-Valérie, 1868) que les mauvaises langues prétendent fille du comte Andrassy, de la création de l'Empire allemand en faveur des Hohenzollern (1871). L'année suivante, sa grand-mère, l'archiduchesse Sophie décède. En 1873, c'est sa sœur Gisèle qui est mariée au prince Léopold de Bavière, mariage de convenance mais politiquement inutile.
    
Lorsqu'il atteint l'âge de dix-neuf ans, Rodolphe achève ses études. Latour est remplacé par comte Aloÿs de Bombelles qui n'est l'aîné du prince que de quatre ans. Alors qu'il veut faire des études de sciences naturelles, notamment d'ornithologie, Rodolphe est contraint de poursuivre sa carrière dans les armes. Ainsi, en 1879, il commence à servir au ''Trente-sixième régiment d'infanterie''.

=== Vie publique ===
Rodolphe et son père ne parlent jamais politique ensemble. L'empereur a d'ailleurs très tôt interdit à son fils de lui adresser la parole en premier ; le jeune prince ne peut donc guère discuter de ce qui lui tient à cœur.

Rodolphe a des idées politiques libérales opposées au conservatisme de son père. Proche des milieux progressistes et libéraux, le seul moyen qu'il ait trouvé pour critiquer la ligne suivie par son père est d'écrire de nombreux articles dans divers viennois, publiés sous plusieurs pseudonymes, où il défend son idéal. D'un point de vue social, il combat ainsi le cléricalisme et les privilèges de l'aristocratie, dénonce la misère des travailleurs. Sur un plan diplomatique, il refuse le traité avec l'Allemagne au profit d'une alliance avec la Russie et la France.

Par ailleurs, Rodolphe tient de sa mère un amour profond pour la Guillaume II qu'il méprise profondément, en a 29. Craignant également de mourir avant d'avoir eu le temps d'accomplir son œuvre de libéralisation de l'empire (comme le père de Guillaume II, Frédéric III mort en Louis II.

thumb|Rodolphe et sa femme Stéphanie
=== Mariage et enfants ===
En Vienne.

Pour le couple impérial, c'est un pis-aller : l'empereur n'a guère d'estime pour le père de la fiancée, l'arriviste roi Léopold II qui est également le beau-frère du [[Maximilien Ier du Mexique
|dernier empereur du Mexique]], frère jalousé de François-Joseph, tombé tragiquement sous les balles des républicains de Juarez et qui trompe ouvertement son épouse la reine Marie-Henriette, une archiduchesse d'Autriche de la branche hongroise ! L'impératrice trouve Stéphanie beaucoup trop jeune et laide (elle la surnommera d'ailleurs plus tard « ''le hideux dromadaire'' » ou « ''la paysanne flamande'' »). Les deux fiancés sont en effet plutôt mal assortis, Rodolphe étant un jeune homme très séduisant alors que sa promise,  pas très féminine, a encore un corps d'enfant.

La princesse Stéphanie lui donnera une fille, l’archiduchesse Elisabeth, née le 2 septembre 1883 au château de Laxenbourg. La naissance de la petite princesse, surnommée ''Erzsi'', est une déception pour ses parents qui espéraient un fils. Rodolphe est également le père présumé de Robert Pachmann, fils probable de l’archiduchesse Marie-Antoinette d’Autriche-Toscane.

=== Relations extra-conjugales ===
Le mariage, heureux au départ, se solde rapidement par un échec. Rodolphe est très intelligent, peu conventionnel, impulsif et très libéral, alors que Stéphanie est plutôt sérieuse, protocolaire et terne. Les désaccords grandissent peu à peu, et Rodolphe finit par retrouver son ancienne vie de célibataire. Il multiplie les conquêtes, et prend pour principale maîtresse Mizzi Caspar dès 1886.

Suite à ses nombreuses relations extra-conjugales, le prince héritier finit par attraper une forme de alcool, afin de surmonter son dépression et d'anxiété, il se sait incurable, et tente par tous les moyens de cacher son mauvais état à son père.

{|align=right
|{{Infobox_Person | name = Rudolf, Crown Prince of Austria
| other_names = 
| image =Mayerling10.jpg
| caption =
| birth_date = 
| birth_place =  Laxenburg, Austrian Empire
| death_date = , aged 
| death_place =  Mayerling, Austria-Hungary
| buried =Imperial Crypt, Vienna
| title = Crown Prince and Archduke of Austria, Crown Prince of Hungary and Bohemia
| spouse =  Princess Stéphanie of Belgium
| children = Archduchess Elisabeth Marie of Austria
| parents =  Emperor Franz Josef I of Austria (father) <br> Duchess Elisabeth in Bavaria (mother)
}} 
'''Archduke Rudolf, Crown Prince of Austria, Hungary and Bohemia''' (Elisabeth of Austria. His death, apparently through mistress, Mayerling  hunting lodge in conspiracy rumours and ultimately may have sealed the long-term fate of the Habsburg monarchy. The exact cause and circumstances of his death remain a mystery to this day.

== Background ==
left|thumb|Image of the young crown prince and his wife Stefanie of Belgium taken just prior to their wedding
Crown Prince Rudolf was born on August 21, 1858 in Schloss Laxenburg
<ref name=RudolfNHM>
     "Crown Prince Rudolf (1858-1889)" (museum notes),
     Natural History Museum of Vienna, 2006,
     [http://www.nhm-wien.ac.at/NHM/Mineral/Rudolfe.htm NHM-Wien-Rudolfe].
</ref>
near Gisela under the direct supervision of their paternal grandmother, Archduchess Sophie. His parents' oldest child, a daughter named Sophie, died at age 2 and before Rudolf was born while younger sister Marie-Valerie was born 10 years after Rudolf. Hence, Gisela and Rudolf grew up together and were very close. At age 6, he was separated from his beloved sister as he begun his education on being a future Emperor. This did not change their relationship and Gisela remained close to him until she left Vienna upon her marriage to Prince Leopold of Bavaria. The siblings' parting was said to be very emotional.     

In contrast with his deeply conservative father, Crown Prince Rudolf held distinctively liberal views that were closer to those of his mother. Nevertheless his relationship with her was strained and contained little warmth. On King Leopold II of the Belgians, in The Augustinian's Church in Archduchess Elisabeth, was born on September 2, 1883, the couple had drifted apart, and he found solace in drink and female companionship. 

In 1887, Rudolf bought Mayerling and adapted it into a hunting lodge. In the autumn of 1888, the 30-year-old crown prince met the 17-year-old Baroness Marie Vetsera, known by the more fashionable Anglophile name Mary.  From the start, Mary adored him, and was ready to do anything for him. It was almost certainly not the great romance of his life, but Rudolf did have feelings for her, and was touched by her limitless, almost fanatical, love for him.

==The Mayerling "Suicide Pact"==

According to official reports, their deaths were a result of Franz Josef's demand that the couple end the relationship: the Crown Prince, as part of a suicide pact, shot his mistress in the head, then himself. Rudolf was officially declared to have been in a state of "mental unbalance" in order to enable burial in the Capuchin Church in Vienna. Mary's body was smuggled out of Mayerling in the middle of the night, and secretly buried in the cemetery of Holy Cross Abbey in Heiligenkreuz, and the Emperor had Mayerling converted into a penitential convent of Carmelite nuns. Today prayers are still said daily by the nuns for the repose of Rudolf's soul.

==Suicide or murder?==
thumb|left|Mayerling, place where Rudolf and his mistress died
thumb|left|Press drawing of the bereaved parents and the widow of Rudolf 
Many people however doubted the truthfulness of the report. Before her death in 1989, Empress Zita, widow of the last Austrian Emperor Charles I (r. 1916&ndash;1918), repeated the claim that the young couple had been murdered as part of an attempt to cover up a French plot to overthrow his father, a pro-German conservative, and replace him with Rudolf, a pro-French Liberal. According to Empress Zita, Rudolf had indignantly refused to take part and threatened to inform his father. Empress Zita did not offer any new evidence and her claims, however widely reported, were not given much credence during her lifetime.

In December 1992 the remains of Baroness Vetsera were stolen from the cemetery at Heiligenkreuz. When the missing remains were tracked down, the police, to ensure they were the correct remains, asked the Viennese Medical Institute to examine them. While they did confirm that they were the correct remains, the institution noted how the skull contained no evidence whatsoever of a bullet hole, the supposed means by which Vetsera had been killed by the crown prince. The evidence instead suggested she may have been killed by a series of violent blows to the head. Separately, evidence came to light in the form of a report on the remains of the crown prince, made at the time of the double death. His body showed evidence of a major violent struggle. A report at the time had also noted that all six bullets had been fired from the gun, which it was revealed did not belong to the crown prince.

The official state report of the deaths claimed that the crown prince shot Vetsera before shooting himself with his own gun. It made no mention of the facts subsequently revealed, leading to the conclusion that, for some reason, a cover-up of the actual manner of the deaths had taken place. It is unlikely ever to be clarified as to what really happened. Two theories have been postulated:
:* one theory is that the couple had a violent struggle, and that the crown prince murdered his lover by battering her before shooting himself; in other words, a clear case of murder rather than the suggested double suicide; however, that theory fails to explain the ability of the prince to fire the gun six times as he killed himself, or indeed where the gun came from, given that it was not his weapon;
:* the other theory is that some third party attacked both, battered Vetsera to death, and shot the crown prince. The latter theory does bear some resemblance to the theory postulated for eighty years by Empress Zita, who as Crown Princess from 1914 to 1916 had been a confidante of Rudolf's father, the aging Emperor Franz Josef, and so may have heard his theories, and those of other members of the Austro-Hungarian court, as to the manner of the death of Crown Prince Rudolf.

It would have been difficult for the devoutly Catholic Emperor to admit that his son and heir had killed the girl and himself in a state of "mental unbalance". If there had been any way to claim that the two had been murdered by a third party, that version would have been infinitely preferable. There would have been no need to accuse someone in particular; it would have avoided the public admission that the Crown Prince was an insane murderer and that he had committed suicide.

Putting forward a third party as the killer though, would have likely led to a public demand that the killer be caught and a thorough investigation of the deaths. It may be that some thought that would be undesirable; in any case, the 'mental unbalance' theory was put forward.

It should be also noted that, according to the Canon Law of the Roman Catholic Church, a man who committed suicide should not be given Christian Burial.  However, after the Emperor's exchange of letters with the Pope, Rudolf was buried according to Catholic Rites.  This also suggests that there was unreleased evidence, or maybe even the fact that the murder was ordered by the Emperor himself. There is a theory which suggests that Rudolf had been planning to overthrow the Emperor, or to claim the throne of an independent Hungary, and that his plots were uncovered by the Emperor's inner circle not long before Rudolf was found dead.  Of course all this remains a mystery, at least until the Papal Archive decides to release the letter, which may contain the final and decisive proof.