'''Adam Waldemar Skorek''' was born in Krzczonów, Poland, December 24, 1956. 

He completed Master of Sciences in Electrical Engineering Program at Technical University of Białystok receiving both Master of Sciences and Engineer degree in 1980. His Ph.D. Degree in Electrical Engineering was received at Technical University of Warsaw in 1983. 

Dr. Skorek is a Full Professor and Former Head of the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department at the Université du Québec à Trois-Rivières.

thumb|265px| Prof. Adam W. Skorek, Ph.D., Eng. FEIC, SMIEEE|right 

Prof. Adam Skorek has made a distinctive contribution to advancement of engineering and science by his pioneering works on numerical modeling and simulations of electro-thermal phenomena in industrial environment.

His works on electrical, nanoelectronics devices . 

He has made notable contribution to the devices design and industrial process control. This contribution is reflected in the number of over 100 papers published and presented in journals and conferences .

Successfully approaching pure scientific considerations to the industrial reality, he has had a significant impact to the advancement of human knowledge and technological progress of the society

He is a co-founder of the PARELEC IEEE International Conference considered as a unique and never done before engineering and computer science community event especially dedicated to the parallel computing applications in electrical engineering. 

Adam is a very actif Senior Member of the Instiitute of Electrical and Computer Engineering (IEEE). His IEEE implications includes Industry Applications Society Executive Board (2001-2003 and  2005 - …) and Chairs of the St-Maurice Section (2003-2004 and 1992-1994), Education Society Chapters Committee (1997 -2001), Eastern Canada Council (1996-1997) and Education Activities Committee of the IEEE Canada. He is recipient of the 2006 IEEE RAB Leadership Award - "In recognition of his dynamic leadership and significant contributions in promoting IEEE and the engineering profession" and  2005 IEEE Canada Wallace S. Read Outstanding Service Award - "In recognition of service to the profession and to the society. 

thumb|250px| [[Lech Wałęsa, Adam Skorek, left
 
Prof. Skorek is a man of enthusiasm, which provides him the capacity for charismatic leadership . This is perhaps demonstrated in his appointment as Head of his Department and also as Chair of the Canadian Heads of Electrical Engineering Departments but it is confirmed by his success in establishing and leading the Industrial Electroheat and NanoHeat Laboratories at his University.

His public activities includes interactions with widely famous people such politicians, journalists, actors, musicians and evidently scientists or engineers. He has served society personally with Prime Minister of Former President of the Republic of Poland. He has done outstanding contribution promoting electrical engineering profession on local, national and international media. 

'''Adam Waldemar Skorek''' est né à Krzczonów en Pologne, le .
thumb|235px| Prof. dr ing. Adam W. Skorek, FEIC, SMIEEE|right 

Il a complété le programme conjoint de magister ingénieur en 1980. Son titre de docteur ès sciences techniques en génie électrique a été obtenu à l'École polytechnique de Varsovie en 1983.
 
Adam W.Skorek est le professeur titulaire au Département de génie électrique et informatique à l'Université du Québec à Trois-Rivières, Québec, Canada et le professeur invité à la Faculté de la gestion de l'École polytechnique de Białystok en Pologne.

Il a été élu (2001) ainsi que réelu (2004) le directeur de son Département et après ses deux mandats totalisants six ans, une élection générale a lui apportée (2007) le privilège de répresenter l'ensemble des professeurs de son institution au Conseil d'administration de l'Université du Québec à Trois-Rivières.

Adam est le membre senior de l'Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (l'IEEE Canada.
 
Prof. Adam Skorek  a apporté une contribution distinctive à l'avancement de la modélisation et les simulations numériques des phénomènes électrothermiques dans l'environnement industriel. 

Ses travaux sur des applications des ordinateurs parallèles à l’analyse des phénomènes  électrothermiques dans l'environnement industriel sont classés au premier rang de sa discipline. Plus spécifiquement,  il est l'inventeur de nouveaux algorithmes numériques destinés aux calculs parallèles pour l'analyse des problèmes thermiques dans des dispositifs électriques, électroniques et nanoelectroniques. 

Il a apporté la contribution notable à l'analyse numérique des phénomènes électrothermiques explorant et appliquant les techniques pionnières aux dispositifs et aux procédés industriels. Cette contribution est reflétée dans le nombre de plus de 100 papiers publiés dans les journaux et présentés aux conférences<ref>A. Skorek, S.V.Blé, G.Anders and J.Nazarko:  “Monte Carlo Algorithm for Nanoscale Electro-Thermal Optimization”, NANOTECH’2007, May 20-24, 2007, Santa Clara, California, U.S.A , ISBN: 1-4200-6349-9.</ref><ref>A. Lakhsasi, A. Skorek: “Dynamic finite element approach for analyzing stress and distortion in multilevel devices”, Journal of Solid-State Electronics, Vol. 46 (6), Elsevier Science, June 2002, pp.925-932</ref><ref>K.Aniserowicz, A.Skorek, C.Cossette, M.Zaremba: "A New Algorithm for Numerical Simulation of Induction Heating of Steel Cylinders", IEEE Transactions on Industrial   Applications, Volume 33,  Number 4, July/August 1997, pp. 893-897</ref>. En approchant avec succès les concepts purement scientifiques à la réalité industrielle, il a eu un impact significatif à l'avancement des connaissances et au progrès technologique.

Il est co-fondateur de la conférence internationale PARELEC parraine par IEEE Computer Society. Cette conférence biennale est un événement d’envergure internationale consacré aux applications de l’informatique parallèle en génie électrique.