{{Emperorcn box|图像=200px|隋炀帝-杨广
|名称=隋炀帝
|姓名=杨广
|庙号=世祖
|谥号=明皇帝、炀皇帝
|陵墓=雷塘
|政权=隋朝
|在世=569年─618年
|在位=604年—618年
|年号=大业：605年—618年三月

}}
'''隋炀帝杨广'''（）是杨坚的次子，是个很有才华、头脑精明，大體上積極、有進取心的人。對於國政，他也有恢宏的抱負，並且戮力付諸實現。主政後，他巡視邊塞、開拓西域、推動大建設。然而最終因人民負荷不了他一而再，再而三的窮兵黷武，遂以残暴留名於世。有人拿商紂王、秦始皇等与他相比，並稱暴君。

==生平==
開皇元年（581年）立為晉王。開皇八年（588年）冬天，隋朝兴兵灭南朝的陈，刚20岁的杨广是領銜的统帅，真正在前線作战的是贺若弼和韩擒虎等名将。灭掉陈後，进驻建康，杨广表现得很有气度：杀掉了陈叔宝的奸佞之臣，封存府库，不贪钱财，最後将陈叔宝及其皇后等人帶返隋京。班師後，杨广进封太尉。

此後，杨广亦屡立战功。开皇十年（590年），他奉命赴江南任扬州总管，平定江南高智慧的叛乱；开皇二十年（600年），他率军北上击破突厥的攻勢。这些功劳是其他皇子所没有的。杨广即帝位後，以早年的军旅生涯为基础，对高句丽、吐谷渾和突厥发动了战争。

在成為皇太子前，楊廣在父亲和母亲楊勇，十一月改立杨广為皇太子。仁寿二年（602年），独孤皇后逝世。两年後，仁壽四年（604年）七月，杨坚病重，駕崩於大寶殿，杨广繼位。

即位以後，他开通大运河，對民生經濟有重大貢獻，但乘龙舟游玩時，耗損了民間物資和人力。然而在教育制度上，楊廣發展科舉制度，增置進士科，使國務的操持由世族门阀政治而逐漸改向科举取士。科舉制度一直延续到清朝光绪三十一年（1905年）才被終止，为中国的育才政策有很大的贡献。政治上，他為了真正實現大一統的理想，企圖打破由關隴仕族壟斷仕途的局面，重用了虞世基、裴蘊等南方集團官員，對破除當時南北隔閡的情況有很大的影響。軍事上，在即位前曾參與與突厥、契丹之戰事，皆有所獲。大業五年，他親征平定吐谷浑，設置西海、河源、鄯善、且末四郡，阔疆五万里。但是楊廣又是一位急功残暴的人。大業八年，首度親征高句麗失敗後，楊廣為扳回其顏面，不顧國內空虛，連續三年一再親征，民不聊生。即位後為實現個人構想，勞動全國投入新宫殿的營造，皇宮用金玉装饰，金碧辉煌，致使国庫完全亏空，劳民伤财。晚年為消除強烈的失落感和政務上的壓力，他逃避現實，三下扬州，鎮日杯不离手，纸醉金迷。最後親信宇文化及所率領的叛軍攻入江都宫，才華洋溢但好大喜功的楊廣慘遭缢死。風華絕代、盛極一時的隋朝不得不走向灭亡。

==弑父傳聞==
仁壽四年（宣华夫人陈氏衣衫不整地跑进来，哭诉杨广在她来途中调戏她，使文帝顿悟，拍床大骂。急忙命人传大臣柳述、元岩草拟诏书，废黜杨广，重立杨勇为太子。杨广得到密报，谋杀了文帝。杨广又假传文帝遗嘱，要杨勇自尽，杨勇未及回答，派去的人就将杨勇拖出杀死。杨广以弑父杀兄的手段夺取了皇位。幼弟楊諒起兵反抗，不久遭鎮壓。

==功業與暴政==
楊廣在位的十三年間，起初為提昇經濟發展和民生便利的層次，曾推動各种建筑包括南北大運河等艱鉅工程，成效非常可觀。但是在執行政策的同時，楊廣也搜罗大江以南、五岭以北的珍材异石來犒賞自己。又為求完美，令各地献上特產、奇禽异兽至京，動用了大量的勞役。此外，在幾度徵召高句麗王入朝而不得後，楊廣遣大軍遠征高句丽。

{| cellpadding=3px cellspacing=0px bgcolor=#f7f8ff style="float:right; border:2px solid; margin:5px;"
|colspan=2 align=center style="border-top:1px solid"|200px
|-
!align=center style="backguti76riuyfiuyfkjyhgfkjhglkjhgfround:#ccf; border-bottom:2px solid" colspan=2|'''Sui Yangdi''' (隋煬帝) 
|-
|align=right style="border-top:1px solid"|Family name:||style="border-top:1px solid"|Yang (楊|杨, yáng)
|-
|align=right style="border-top:1px solid"|Given name:||style="border-top:1px solid"|Guang (廣, guǎng)
|-
|align=right style="border-top:1px solid"|Temple name:||style="border-top:1px solid"|Shizu (世祖, shì zǔ)
|-
|align=right style="border-top:1px solid"|Posthumous name:<br><center>(Per Tang Dynasty)||style="border-top:1px solid"|Yang (煬, yáng)<br>literary meaning: "slothful"
|-
|align=right style="border-top:1px solid"|Posthumous name:<br><center>(Per Yang Tong)||style="border-top:1px solid"|Ming (明, míng)<br>literary meaning: "understanding"
|-
|align=right style="border-top:1px solid"|Posthumous name:<br><center>(Per Dou Jiande)||style="border-top:1px solid"|Min (閔, mǐn)<br>literary meaning: "careful"
|}

'''Emperor Yang of Sui''' (隋煬帝, 569 - March 11, 618), personal name '''Yang Guang''' (楊廣), alternative name '''Ying''' (英), nickname '''Amo''' (阿摩), known as '''Emperor Ming''' (明帝) during the brief reign of his grandson Yang Tong), was the second son of Emperor Wen of Sui, and the second emperor of China's Sui Dynasty.

Emperor Yang's original name was Yang Ying, but was renamed by his father, after consulting with oracles, to Yang Guang.  Yang Guang was made the Prince of Jin after Emperor Wen established Sui Dynasty in 581.  In 588 he was put in charge of the overall command of the five armies that invaded the southern Chen Dynasty, and was widely praised for the success of this campaign.  These military achievements, as well as his machinations in finding faults with his older brother Yang Yong, allowed him to become crown prince in 600 after Emperor Wen believed in the accusations against Yang Yong.  After the death of his father in 604 -- a death that most traditional historians believed to be a murder ordered by Yang Guang, although they admit a lack of direct evidence -- Yang Guang ascended the throne as Emperor Yang.

Emperor Yang, ruling from Grand Canal.  He caused the reconstruction of the Great Wall, a project which took the lives of nearly six million workers.  He also ordered several military expeditions that brought Sui to its greatest territorial extent, one of which, the conquest of disastrous campaigns against strangled in a coup led by his general Yuwen Huaji.

Emperor Yang committed almost eight million people to constructing roads, palaces, the Grand Canal, the Great Wall and ships. The re-designing of Luoyang, designated as the eastern capital, alone consumed a quarter of that amount, and the building of the Grand Canal took up 2 million men.  Equally manpower-consuming were the three expeditions against Goguryeo, each one needing about a million men. 

Despite his accomplishments, Emperor Yang was generally considered by traditional historians to be one of the worst tyrants in Chinese history and the reason for the Sui Dynasty's relatively short rule.

== Background ==
Yang Guang was born in Yang Jian the Duke of Sui and Yang Jian's wife Duchess Dugu Qieluo.  He was their second son, after Yang Lihua, who became the wife of Emperor Wu's Yuwen Yun (the later Emperor Xuan) in 573.  He was considered handsome and intelligent in his youth, and of Yang Jian's and Duchess Dugu's sons, they favored him the most.  Sometime during Northern Zhou, on account of Yang Jian's achievements, he was created the Duke of Yanmen.

In Emperor Jing, yield the throne to him, ending Northern Zhou and establishing Sui Dynasty as its Emperor Wen.  Emperor Wen created Yang Yong crown prince and created his other sons imperial princes.  Yang Guang thus received the title of Prince of Jin.

== As Prince of Jin ==

Also in 581, Emperor Wen made Yang Guang the commandant at Bing Province (并州, roughly modern daughter of his vassal Emperor Ming of Western Liang (Xiao Kui) to be Yang Guang's wife and princess.  It was said that Yang Guang loved and respected her.

In Shabolüe Khan Ashina Shetu submitted to Sui.  Yang Guang suggested to Emperor Wen that he rejected Ashina Shetu's overture and launch a major attack on Tujue, but Emperor Wen refused.  In Datou Khan Ashina Dianjue, Emperor Wen in fact sent Yang Guang to aid Ashina Shetu.

In Yang Jun, and the general Yang Su were in command of the three main prongs of the operation, with Yang Guang in command of the eastern prong as well as the overall operation.  The key official Gao Jiong served as Yang Guang's assistant.  In spring 589, the generals Han Qinhu (韓擒虎) and Heruo Bi (賀若弼), both under Yang Guang, crossed the Yangtze River and approached the Chen capital Jiankang.  Soon, after Heruo defeated the Chen general Xiao Mohe, Jiankang fell, and the Chen emperor Chen Shubao was captured.  Yang Guang, apparently fascinated by Chen Shubao's favorite concubine Consort Zhang Lihua, sent Gao Jiong's son Gao Dehong (高德弘) to order Gao Jiong to hold Consort Zhang.  Instead, Gao Jiong, comparing Consort Zhang to Daji (the wicked wife of King Zhou of Shang), beheaded her.  Yang Guang thereafter resented Gao greatly, stating sarcastically, "It has been said, 'You should repay every good deed done to you.' I will repay Duke Gao later."  By Yang Guang's orders, several of Chen Shubao's favorite officials, who were considered reasons for Chen's downfall, including Shi Wenqing (施文慶), Shen Keqing (沈客卿), Yang Huilang (陽慧朗), Xu Xi (徐析), and Ji Huijing (暨慧景), were executed.  It was said that the people praised Yang Guang for his actions.  Chen Shubao and his own clan members, however, were treated with kindness, and at Yang Guang's request, Chen Shubao sent letters to Chen generals who had not yet surrendered to persuade them to do so, and they largely did.  Later that year, Yang Guang's forces escorted them to the capital Chang'an.  At the ceremony to present Chen Shubao to Emperor Wen, Yang Guang marched into the palace first, and Emperor Wen bestowed on Yang Guang decorated wagons, horses, clothing, and jade.  Afterwards, Yang Jun was given the Yang Province (then moved to modern Yangzhou, Jiangsu) commandant post, and Yang Guang was returned to Bing Province.  In 590, Emperor Wen swapped the defense posts of Yang Jun and Yang Guang, returning Yang Guang to Yang Province.

In 594, Yang Guang urged Emperor Wen to offer sacrifices to Mount Tai -- a traditional ceremony for emperors, but one that was rarely carried out.  Emperor Wen rejected the elaborate traditional ceremonies, but did carry out a reduced ceremony at Mount Tai.

In spring 600, with Ashina Dianjue, who had by now become Tujue's khan, attacking the borders, Emperor Wen sent Yang Guang, Yang Su the Duke of Yue, Yang Guang's brother Yang Liang the Prince of Han, and Shi Wansui (史萬歲) the Duke of Taiping, against Tujue, and they were largely successful against Ashina Dianjue, protecting the Qimin Khan Ashina Rangan, whom Sui supported, from Ashina Dianjue's attack.

By 600, Yang Guang's older brother Yang Yong had lost the favors of Emperor Wen and Empress Dugu -- over his wastefulness (which displeased Emperor Wen) and his having many concubines (which displeased Empress Dugu).  Yang Guang, by contrast, pretended to be frugal and loving only Princess Xiao.  (It was written that Yang Guang did have concubines, but he pretended that he did not, and that he forced his concubines to have abortions if they became pregnant.)  Yang Guang further inflamed Empress Dugu by informing her that she believed that Yang Yong was determined to kill him eventually.  Empress Yang thus resolved to remove Yang Yong.  Yang Guang further had his associate Yuwen Shu persuade Yang Su's brother Yang Yue (楊約) that, because Yang Su's relationship with Yang Yong was not good, that their family would be in peril should Yang Yong succeed Emperor Wen.  Finally, Yang Guang also had Yang Yong's associate Ji Wei (姬威) accuse Yang Yong of plotting treason.  Emperor Wen had Yang Su investigate, and Yang Guang and Yang Su manufactured evidence against Yang Yong.  Emperor Wen deposed Yang Yong and replaced him with Yang Guang, putting Yang Yong under house arrest under Yang Guang's watch.  Yang Guang later prevented Yang Yong from all attempts of seeing his parents again.

== As crown prince ==
By Yang Xiu the Prince of Shu, who, as commandant of Yi Province (益州, roughly modern Chengdu, Sichuan), had great resources at his disposal.  He collected evidence of Yang Xiu's wrongdoing, particularly wastefulness, and had Yang Su submit them to Emperor Wen.  Emperor Wen summoned Yang Xiu back to the capital and had Yang Su investigate, and both Yang Guang and Yang Su further manufactured evidence against Yang Xiu.  Emperor Wen reduced Yang Xiu to commoner rank and put him under house arrest.

Also in 602, Empress Dugu died.  It was said that Yang Guang pretended to mourn greatly, refusing most foods, but in private continued to dine normally.

In 604, while Emperor Wen was at his vacation palace Renshou Palace (仁壽宮, in modern Baoji, Shaanxi), he fell ill and then died -- a death, however, that traditional historians, while admitting a lack of direct evidence, believed to be a murder ordered by Yang Guang (see below).  Yang Guang, after sending Yang Yue to kill Yang Yong, announced Emperor Wen's death and took the throne as Emperor Yang.

== Early reign ==
An immediate challenge that Emperor Yang faced was a rebellion by his brother Yang Liang, then the commandant at Bing Province, who was encouraged by the generals Wang Kui (王頍) and Xiao Mohe.  Yang Liang received support from 19 provinces, but lacked a coherent plan as to whether to try to challenge Emperor Yang for the control of the entire empire, or just the region north of the Yellow River.  After some initial successes, Yang Liang's offenses stalled.  Emperor Yang sent Yang Su against him, and Yang Su proceeded quickly to Yang Liang's headquarters at Bing Province, capturing Xiao and forcing Yang Liang to surrender.  Emperor Yang did not execute Yang Liang, but reduced him to commoner rank and imprisoned him for the rest of his life.

In winter 604, believing in the words of the sorcerer Zhangchou Taiyi (章仇太翼) that the geography of Chang'an was not conducive to his health, Emperor Yang went to Luoyang, designating it as the eastern capital, and would rarely return to Chang'an thereafter, although Chang'an remained official the main capital.  He ordered that major construction projects be carried out at Luoyang, commensurate with the necessities of having it as the second capital, and he left his oldest son, Yang Zhao the Prince of Jin, in charge of Chang'an.  He conscripted several hundred thousands of young men to dig a lengthy trench to surround the Luoyang region, intending that it serve as a defense parameter.  He also ordered that women and servants be exempted from head taxes, and that men would only be considered adults (i.e., subject to conscription) when they turn 21.

In spring Xiao Cong the Duke of Ju (Western Liang's last emperor) and made him, as well as many of her other relatives, important officials, creating him the greater title of Duke of Liang.

Starting in 605, Emperor Yang also started a massive number of construction projects -- including the building of the imperial palace at Luoyang, described to be particularly luxurious.  Further, he conscripted a large number of men to build the Tongji Canal (通濟渠), connecting Luoyang with the Yellow River and connecting the Yellow River with the Huai River, as well as to rebuild the Han Canal (邗溝), connecting the Huai River and the Yangtze River.  The two canals, which would eventually become parts of the Grand Canal of China, were said to be constructed within five months, but at substantial cost of life -- 40% to 50% of the men employed.  Emperor Yang also ordered that some 40 secondary palaces be built around the empire, so that he could visit the various provinces, arguing that he needed to do so to see the conditions of the empire so that he could govern effectively.

In fall 605, after the completion of the Tongji and Han Canals, Emperor Yang carried out the first of 11 (counting military campaigns) tours that he would eventually undertake of various parts of the empire, going to Jiangdu -- the capital of Yang Province, where he had been commandant previously -- on an imperial ship that was said to be sufficiently large and luxurious to serve as floating palaces.

Also in 605, when Khitan tribes attacked Ying Province (營州, roughly modern Zhaoyang, Liaoning), Emperor Yang had the official Wei Yunqi (韋雲起) requisition Tujue troops under Ashina Rangan to attack Khitan.  The Khitan forces were caught by surprise and defeated.

In summer 606, Yang Zhao the Crown Prince became ill while visiting Luoyang, and soon died.  Emperor Yang would not create another crown prince for the rest of his reign, creating Yang Zhao's sons Yang Tan (楊倓), Yang You imperial princes, while initially apparently tacitly considering his second son, Yang Jian the Prince of Qi (note different character than Emperor Wen) the de facto successor, leaving Yang Jian in charge of Luoyang whenever he would be away from Luoyang.  Yang Su, whom Emperor Yang pretended to respect but actually feared, also died in summer 606.

Also in 606, Emperor Yang ordered that two massive food storages -- the Luokou Storage (洛口倉) and the Huiluo Storage (回洛倉) -- be constructed near Luoyang.

In spring 607, Ashina Rangan visited Emperor Yang at Luoyang.  Also in spring 607, at the instigation of Yuwen Shu, Emperor Yang had Yang Yong's eight sons put to death.

In summer 607, Emperor Yang abolished provinces and changed them to commanderies.  At the same time, he reorganized his father's governmental system of having five main bureaus, keeping four of the main bureaus -- the executive bureau (尚書省, ''Shangshu Sheng''), the examination bureau (門下省, ''Menxia Sheng''), the legislative bureau (內史省, ''Neishi Sheng''), the archival bureau (秘書省, ''Mishu Sheng'') -- while abolishing the eunuch bureau and replacing it with the palace bureau (殿內省, ''Diannei Sheng'').  He established three additional independent agencies and five independent departments.  He also organized the imperial army into 16 corps.  He abolished three levels of noble titles -- the counts, the viscounts, and the barons -- keeping only the princes, the dukes, and the marquesses.

Also in summer 607, Emperor Yang embarked on a tour of the northern provinces, building an imperial highway from Chang'an to Jinyang (晉陽, the capital of Bing Province).  He then personally visited the imperial tent of Ashina Rangan, whose display of submission and loyalty caused Emperor Yang to bestow much honor and wealth on him.  When the senior officials Gao Jiong, Yuwen Bi (宇文弼), and Heruo Bi privately expressed disapproval, Emperor Yang discovered their criticism and put all of them to death, while removing Su Wei, who also discouraged him from giving excessive rewards to Ashina Rangan, from his post.  (Traditional historians attribute Gao's death to Gao's refusal to keep Chen Shubao's Consort Zhang alive in 589.)  As Xiao Cong had a deep friendship with Heruo Bi, and there had been rumors that the Xiaos would rise again, the superstitious Emperor Yang also removed Xiao Cong from his post.

Also in 607, at the instigation of Pei Ju, Emperor Yang reopened relations with Xiyu states.

In spring 608, Emperor Yang conscripted over a million men to construct the Yongji Canal (永濟渠), from the Yellow River to Zhuo Commandery (涿郡, roughly modern Beijing).  It was said that there were not enough men, and he started conscripting women as well.

In 608, after persuasion by the Sui official Cui Junsu (崔君肅), the Han, submitted to Sui as a vassal.  However, also in 608, Emperor Yang received a letter claiming to be from the King of Japan, Duolisibigu (多利思比孤, now commonly believed to be Prince Shōtoku), stating, "The Son of Heaven where the sun rises, to the Son of Heaven where the son sets, may good health be with you."  Displeased by what he saw as insolence, he ordered that in the future, "insolent" letters from other states not be submitted to him.

Also in 608, initially over disputes over women (Yang Jian's having taken a concubine that Emperor Yang himself wanted) and hunting (Yang Jian's guards having been much more successful than Emperor Yang's guards at hunting), Emperor Yang's relationship with Yang Jian began to deteriorate.  He ordered investigations into Yang Jian's violation of laws, and discovered that Yang Jian had used witchcraft to curse Yang Zhao's three sons.  In anger, Emperor Yang executed and exiled a number of Yang Jian's associates, but he did not depose Yang Jian, although from this point on Yang Jian did not exert much influence on the political scene.

In 608 as well, Pei Ju persuaded the Tiele tribes to attack Tuyuhun, forcing Tuyuhun's Busabuo Khan Murong Fuyun to flee.  Murong Fuyun initially considered submitting to Sui, and Emperor Yang sent Yuwen with an army to welcome him.  However, when Murong Fuyun changed his mind, Yuwen attacked him and seized much of Tuyuhun's people.  When Murong Fuyun fled further, Emperor Yang had his forces seize Tuyuhun's territory, establishing four commanderies, to be populated with exiles.

== Middle reign ==
In spring 609, Ashina Rangan made another visit to Emperor Yang, and Emperor Yang again rewarded him with much treasure.

Also in spring 609, Emperor Yang ordered a redistribution of the farming land throughout the empire.

Later in spring 609, Emperor Yang conducted a tour of the newly conquered Tuyuhun territory, and sent several generals to chase down Murong Fuyun.  The Sui forces engaged Murong Fuyun's remaining forces, with mixed success, but Murong Fuyun was forced to flee to Dangxiang tribes.  Emperor Yang tried to impose Murong Fuyun's son Murong Shun, whom Murong Fuyun had earlier sent to Sui as a hostage, as Tuyuhun's new khan, but the Tuyuhun people would not accept him, and Murong Shun was forced back to Sui territory.  Emperor Yang also received 27 rulers of Xiyu kingdoms in an audience at Zhangye (張掖, in modern Zhangye, Gansu).

Later in the year, Ashina Rangan died, and was succeeded by his son Shibi Khan Ashina Duojishi.  Pursuant to Tujue customs, Ashina Duojishi requested permission from Emperor Yang to marry Ashina Rangan's wife Princess Yicheng (the daughter of a clansman of Emperor Yang).  Emperor Yang agreed.  Also in 609, Emperor Yang, jealous of the literary talent of the official Xue Daoheng (薛道衡), he falsely accused Xue of defaming the emperor and had Xue strangled.

By this time, it was said that Emperor Yang's lifestyle had become particularly wasteful, and that he no longer felt bound by moral principles.

In 610, Emperor Yang visited Jiangdu again, and this time elevated Jiangdu's importance so that it effectively became a third capital.

When Emperor Yang was visiting Ashina Rangan in 607, a messenger from King Yeong-yang to Ashina Rangan happened to be present, and Ashina Rangan introduced him to Emperor Yang.  Emperor Yang ordered Gao Yuan to come visit him, offering to reward him if he did so and to punish him if he did not do so.  Gao Yuan did not respond, and by 611, Emperor Yang, insulted by the lack of response, was preparing a campaign against Goguryeo.  With Sui appearing to be in its prime, both governmental officials and the people were initially in support of a campaign to conquer Goguryeo.  In spring 611, Emperor Yang went to Zhuo Commandery and announced the campaign against Goguryeo.  Several hundred men were conscripted, and it was said that even before they could get to Zhuo Commandery, disease and fatigue had already caused much loss of life.  In response, a number of conscripted soldiers deserted and became agrarian rebels.

Also in 611, angry that Western Tujue's khan Ashina Daman, while nominally submissive, had refused to visit him, Emperor Yang had Pei Ju persuade Ashina Daman's subordinate khan Ashina Shegui (阿史那射匱) to rebel against Ashina Daman, promising to give him a Sui princess in marriage.  Ashina Shegui thus rebelled against Ashina Daman, forcing Ashina Daman to flee, first to Gaochang, then to Sui.  Emperor Yang accepted Ashina Daman's submission, and thereafter divided his people into three groups, while leaving Ashina Daman as titularly khan, although he never allowed Ashina Daman to return to his people.