Dans l’univers de ''Babylon 5'', '''John David Sheridan''' (surnommé ''John J. Sheridan'') est le commandant de la station Babylon 5 de janvier 2259 à décembre 2261. Il a été incarné par l’acteur Bruce Boxleitner.

== Biographie ==

Né sur Terre en 2215, fils d’un diplomate de l’Delenn de Mir.

=== Début de carrière ===
John Sheridan embrasse la carrière militaire en entrant à l’Académie des Forces terriennes en 2236. Il en sort diplômé trois ans plus tard, et épouse une autre diplomée, Elizabeth Lochley, dont il se sépare rapidement.

Il a servi comme officier en second dans plusieurs missions. Ayant refusé une mission de premier contact dans l’espace minbari, le lieutenant Sheridan assiste le capitaine Sterns à bord du croiseur de combat ''Lexington'' au début de la guerre Terre-Minbari. Pendant ce conflit, malgré la perte de son officier commandant, il parvient à détruire un croiseur minbari meurtrier, l’''Étoile noire'', seule réelle victoire d’importance des Humains pendant la guerre.

Au retour de la paix, en 2248, il est promu commandant des Forces terrestres sur le satellite de Jupiter, Io. Il participa à la répression des émeutes sur Mars en 2251.

Promu commandant en 2253, il obtient le commandement d’un croiseur de combat en 2256 à bord de l’''Agamemnon''.

C’est au début de son commandement qu’il perd son épouse, Anna Sheridan. La scientifique meurt dans l’explosion de l'''Icarus'', vaisseau d’exploration envoyé sur une planète lointaine, Z’ha’dum. Sheridan va se concentrer sur sa carrière pour oublier sa femme.

=== Commandement sur Babylon 5 ===
Début janvier 2259, il est nommé par le président William Clark commandant de la station spatiale Babylon 5, un avant-poste commercial et diplomatique de l’Alliance terrienne. Il y remplace le commandant Jeffrey Sinclair.

Sheridan y démontre des capacités de stratèges et tacticiens qui ont permis de sauver plusieurs fois la station. Il y noue également des relations fortes avec plusieurs des ambassadeurs, comme la Minbarie Delenn et le Vorlon Kosh Naranek.

De 2259 à avril 2260, Sheridan essaie sans se faire découvrir de trouver des preuves que le président Santiago a été assassiné par son successeur et de comprendre la nouvelle menace que constituent les Ombres. Il parvient ainsi à prendre le commandement d’une Armée de lumière (''Army of Light'') où se regroupent les officiers terriens de la station et les Rangers luttant contre les Ombres.

En 2260-2261, Sheridan dirige la flotte de la Ligue des mondes non alignés contre les Ombres. Il est porté disparu après une héroïque attaque contre leur capitale sur Z’ha’dum. Ayant rejoint Babylon 5, il parvient à la victoire finale lors de la bataille de Coriana VI. 

{{Babylon5 character
|image=Image:B5 sheridan.jpg
|name=John J. Sheridan
|race=Human
|affiliation=Babylon 5, EarthForce, Anla'shok, Interstellar Alliance
|planet=Earth
|start=''In the Beginning'' (chronological),
"Points of Departure" (airdate)
|finish="Deconstruction of Falling Stars" (chronological)
"Voices in the Dark" (airdate)
|portrayed=Bruce Boxleitner
}}
'''John J. Sheridan''' is a lead character in the fictional universe of the science-fiction television series ''Babylon 5'', played by Bruce Boxleitner. For most of the series he is the commander of the Babylon 5 station; during the series final season he is the President of the Interstellar Alliance.

==Personality==
John Sheridan is decisive and strong-willed. He is also a dynamic, idealistic, and charismatic leader who can inspire fierce loyalty in his subordinates. However, Sheridan is shown at times to be reckless and stubborn, and like his second-in-command Susan Ivanova he possesses a fierce temper that can lead to occasional explosive outbursts of anger. Fortunately, he tends to calm quickly and he usually demonstrates a cheerful and upbeat personality. His second wife, Anna Sheridan, was (apparently) killed while exploring a distant planet, and when he takes command of Babylon 5 at the start of Season 2 her death still troubles him. 

After Sheridan's "return from the dead" in the fourth season he displays an increasing impatience with accomplishing his goals; however, this is caused by the fact that he knows he has only twenty more years to live. By the end of the series Sheridan has become a galactic president and legend, and overall there is little doubt that he has been a force for good throughout most of the series.

==Religious and Astrological references==
Throughout the show numerous references are made concerning astrology and Sheridan's analogous role in history to that of a messiah.
After the defeat of the Shadows in season four episode Into The Fire, Sheridan comments to Delennn  "This is a new age Delenn, the third age". The third age is the age of Aquarius, the first and second being Aries and Pisces. An Astrological age is approximately 2160 years. The age of Pisces is generally regarded to have started at year 1 AD. That would make the year 2162 the first year of Aquarius, which is exactly when the shadow war takes place. Also a number of religious phrases are used to refer to Sheridan: messiah, messianic, and The second coming. In Season four episode 17, The Face of the Enemy, When Michael Garibaldi speaks with William Edgars about capturing Sheridan, Garibaldi says "I don't know, but I think the last guy got 30 pieces of silver for the same job" a reference to Judas' betrayal of Jesus. John Marco Allegro is the main propenet of a theory about a number of historical messiah being analogies for astrological phenomena including Attis, Krishna, Dionysus, Mithra, Horus and Jesus. The theory says that Moses was the personification of the age of Aries, and Jesus was the personification of the age of Pisces. Thus the next messiah or the second coming of Jesus would be in the age of Aquarius. <ref>Astrotheology & Shamanism by Jan Irvin and Andrew Rutajit, 2006 - ISBN 1-58509-107-3</ref>

Another interesting event is when Sheridan falls and is caught by the Kosh in season 2 episode The Fall of Night. Kosh, not wanting to reveal his true form, appears as a different religious figure depending on the onlookers homeworld. Because Sheridan is Human, he perceived him as being an angel. Matthew  says "To his heavenly messengers he will give orders about you, and with their hands they will catch you". Which was the devil telling Jesus that if he were to fall, angels would catch him saving him from his death.

Sheridan was also resurrected twice by Lorien. The first time on Z'ha'dum in season four: Whatever Happened To Mr. Garibaldi, right after Sheridan askes Lorien "If I fall how will I know if you'll catch me", and the second was on Babylon 5 during a fight with Falling toward Apotheosis further solidifying his parallels with historical messiah.

==Character history==
===Early life and career===

John Sheridan was born on Earth to an Earth Alliance diplomat.  As a young man he joined EarthForce, was married briefly to Elizabeth Lochley, and by 2243 had risen to the rank of lieutenant commander.

In the TV-movie ''In the Beginning'' he was offered the first officer position aboard the EarthForce warship, ''Prometheus''. The ''Prometheus'' later was the ship that precipitated the  Black Star'', Sheridan took command of the ''Lexington''. With the ''Lexington'' crippled and unable to fight, Sheridan mined several nearby asteroids with nuclear weapons and lured the ''Black Star'' back towards his ship with a fake distress signal. He then detonated the nuclear mines, destroying the ''Black Star'' and giving Earth its only real victory in the war. The infuriated Minbari nicknamed Sheridan the "Starkiller". For his action Sheridan was awarded the EarthForce Silver Star and he became one of the few human heroes to survive the war.

Following the war, Sheridan was promoted to the rank of Captain and given command of the EAS ''Agamemnon'' in the mid-2250s. The ''Agamemnon'' was one of the new "Omega-Class" destroyers which were much larger and more powerful than the older "Hyperion-Class" warships. Sheridan spent the next few years leading the ''Agamemnon'' in exploratory and diplomatic missions. He was one of the candidates to command Babylon 5, but was rejected by the Minbari in favor of Jeffrey Sinclair. However, Earth Alliance President Santiago had kept him as his first choice in the event something happened to Sinclair.

===Season 2===
When Commander Minbar in January 2259, Sheridan was chosen to command Babylon 5. Sheridan was initially not well received by the Minbari, and was still called "Starkiller" by many in the warrior caste (referring to the engagement in which the ''Black Star'' was destroyed). Soon after his arrival, in "Points of Departure", the Minbari ship ''Trigati'', which had disappeared during the Battle of the Line, reappeared and tried to provoke him into firing upon them. However, Sheridan remained cool and defused the situation. Even with the strained relations with the Minbari, Delenn and Sheridan began to develop a close friendship. Sheridan also had some initial doubts about taking command of Babylon 5 because he feared being turned into a bureaucrat, but after helping to rescue the EAS Cortez after an accident in hyperspace, he realized he was in the right place.

Sheridan soon discovered that Earth Alliance President Clark was slowly turning the Earth Alliance into a dictatorship. Sheridan found that the Nightwatch, an SA-like organization, had recruited much of the station's security.

Soon into the season, it became known that the Shadows had returned and were beginning to move again, and even covertly aided the Centauri in defeating the Narn. When Sheridan attempted to aid a Narn vessel, the Centauri attacked Babylon 5, forcing him to destroy a Centauri warship. Given the choice of either apologizing to the Centauri or losing his command, Sheridan decided to apologize. A group of Centauri civilians attempted to assassinate Sheridan, but he was saved by Vorlon Ambassador Kosh and the formality of the apology was dismissed in view of this event. After the fall of Narn, Minbari Ambassador Delenn revealed the existence of the Rangers to Sheridan, and offered him shared command of the Rangers on Babylon 5. Sheridan vowed that the Rangers would hold the line against the darkness, no matter what the cost.

===Season 3===
At the beginning of the third season, Sheridan was presented with the prototype White Star class spacecraft. On his first mission in command of ''White Star One'', he helped Rangers stationed at a training camp under Centauri blockade escape before being captured by the Shadows. At the same time, he had to keep an Earth Alliance official snooping around the station unaware of that mission, and his knowledge of the Shadow's involvement.

In the episode "''Messages from Earth'', he destroyed the vessel rather than allowing it to fall into their hands. This led to Clark declaring martial law throughout the Earth Alliance. After martial law was declared, Sheridan defeated the Nightwatch forces by luring them into a trap.

The ''EAS Alexander'', under the command of General William Hague, was leading the efforts against Clark. Hague was killed in an attack on the ''Alexander,'' but the ship escaped and reached Babylon 5. The EAS ''Churchill'' joined the ''Alexander'' at Babylon 5. The ''Churchill'' brought information that an attack force was a few hours away, and that the force was coming to arrest Sheridan and his staff.

Mars had decided not to implement martial law. In response Clark ordered his forces to bomb civilian targets on Mars. In response, Proxima 3 and Orion 7 seceded from the Earth Alliance. In "Severed Dreams" Sheridan joined them and declared Babylon 5's own secession. Very soon after Sheridan's declaration, an attack force arrived consisting of two Omega-class destroyers. Clark's attack force was soon defeated at Babylon 5. Unfortunately, the reinforcements for Clark's attack force then arrived. Sheridan realizing that his position was hopeless was prepared to accept defeat, but at that moment Delenn came to his rescue, leading several Minbari War Cruisers to the station, while herself commanding ''White Star One''. When told by the EarthForce ships to leave or they would engage her fleet, Delenn answered:

Realizing the situation, the EarthForce reinforcements turned around and withdrew. 

In the episode "War Without End" Sheridan learned that he had a role to play in the disappearance of Babylon 4. Sheridan, Delenn, Marcus Cole, Ambassador Sinclair, Lennier, and Ivanova went back in time to intercept Shadow allies who were on their way to destroy that station. In a mishap, Sheridan was flung seventeen years into the future. He found himself on a devastated Centauri Prime, about to be put to death by Emperor Mollari. During this time he also learned that he had married Delenn and had a son, David. Instead of an execution, Mollari let them go. While on the way to the ship, Sheridan was pulled back into time, and back to Babylon 4. They were then able to send Babylon 4 into the distant past where it was used to fight in the first Shadow war. Sinclair stayed on board, and transformed himself into the Minbari religious figure Valen.

For the remainder of 2260, Sheridan's attention was directed mainly against the Shadows and the upcoming war. He began to build up an alliance of races for the larger fight. Sheridan then led a large multi-species attack force against the Shadows. While the force was able to drive them off, the allies lost far many more ships than they had hoped. For every Shadow vessel they killed, two of their ships had been destroyed.

The Shadows found that Sheridan's wife Anna was still alive, and that she was acting as the CPU for a Shadow vessel. The Shadows pulled her out as soon as they made the connection between her and Sheridan. Because of her time in the Shadow vessel, her original personality had died. A new personality had developed, which was totally loyal to the Shadows. They then sent Anna to Babylon 5 to bring Sheridan to them on Z'ha'dum.

Sheridan was once told by Kosh that if he went to Z'ha'dum he would die. During his vision of the future, that version of Delenn told him not to go to Z'ha'dum; also during the vision, Centauri Prime had been devastated. He began thinking that originally perhaps he had listened to Delenn and did not go to Z'ha'dum. He reasoned that if he did go to Z'ha'dum that the vision of the future he had seen would not occur. So he accompanied Anna on the White Star to Z'ha'dum. What he did not tell her or anyone else was that he had Garibaldi hide two very large fusion bombs on to the ship. A group of Shadow Vessels had surrounded Babylon 5.  At that time, Delenn was listening to a recording that he made. Sheridan explained his reasons for going to Z'ha'dum in the recording, and told her that he loved her.

While on Z'ha'dum, the Shadows attempted to lure Sheridan to their side. Sheridan refused to cooperate. Sheridan escaped from the Shadows momentarily and went to a balcony overlooking their capital city. Anna tried one more time to get Sheridan to cooperate with the Shadows. He refused, ordering the White Star to crash into the city; the resulting nuclear explosion destroyed the capital city. Meanwhile Sheridan, about to be killed by the explosion, jumped off the balcony into a pit that was miles deep after hearing the voice of Ambassador Kosh instructing him to do so.

When the capital city was destroyed, the Shadow vessels left Babylon 5. Sheridan's colleagues realized that he was now dead.

===Season 4===
At the start of the fourth season, the Shadows were still recovering from the destruction of their capital city. The alliance made by Sheridan had started to fall apart. Many governments felt that if they did nothing the Shadows would leave them alone. During this time, Delenn began to organize a large Anla'Shok attack on Z'ha'dum.