thumb|right|Fermin Muguruza
'''Fermin Muguruza''' és un cantant i guitarrista basc que va néixer l'any 1963 a Irun (Guipúscoa), ha estat definit com una de les persones més influents i importants del panorama musical basc.

Va començar la seva carrera musical fundant amb el seu germà Iñigo, el grup musical Kortatu, un dels grups més importants dintre del denominat Rock Radical Basc i pioners a introduir l'ska i el dub al panorama musical basc i espanyol. Al grup, Fermin es va encarregar de tocar la guitarra i cantar com a veu principal. La major part dels temes del grup van ser compostos pels dos germans. 

Quan Kortatu es va dissoldre, Muguruza va formar, de nou al costat d'Iñigo i Kaki Arkarazo, el grup de rock de fusió Negu Gorriak, que ha estat qualificat com «un dels més importants dels 90». Fermin va deixar a un costat la guitarra i es va convertir en la veu principal, exercint com a carismàtic "frontman". Juntament amb els seus companys de grup, va fundar la discogràfica Esan Ozenki Records per a actuar sempre dins del marc de l'autogestió. 

Després de la dissolució de Negu Gorriak va començar la seva carrera en solitari, practicant un estil de fusió amb elements de ritmes llatins, rock, funk, soul i drum and bass barrejant-ho tot amb una mica dereggae. 

Ha col·laborat amb molts artistes de talla internacional com ara Manu Chao, Banda Bassotti, Amparanoia, Tijuana in Blue, Albert Pla, Desorden Público o Reincidentes. 

En aspectes extramusicals, ha exercit com a columnista als periòdics Argia i Egin, i va dur a terme un programa de ràdio a Egin Irratia. 

Políticament parlant, Muguruza ha estat un personatge compromès. Es declara d'esquerres, internacionalista. Ha col·laborat o simpatitzat amb nombroses organitzacions socials i polítiques basques, com les Gestores Pro Amnistia o Herri Batasuna. Al 1999, va ser candidat independent dintre de les llistes de Euskal Herritarrok en les eleccions al Parlament Europeu.

==Biografia==
Va néixer el 20 d'abril de 1963 a Irun, Guipúscoa. 

Des de petit, amb 6 anys, va aprendre solfeig i també a tocar l'Iñigo (més petit que ell) i Jabier (major que ell). Entre els tres van aconseguir reunir una col·lecció de més de 2.000 discos, que van haver de repartir quan Jabier va marxar de casa. 

Fermin va estudiar Pedagogia a la Universitat de Salamanca, on va començar a donar mostres de voler muntar un grup de música. Va ser després d'anar a veure un concert de The Clash a Sant Sebastià quan finalment es va decidir a muntar un conjunt musical. 

Actualment, Fermin Muguruza està casat i és pare d'un nen i una nena. 

thumb|right|220px|Fermin Muguruza
'''Fermin Muguruza''' (Basque Country) is a Basque rock musician, singer, songwriter, producer and record label manager. He is the brother of musicians Iñigo Muguruza and Jabier Muguruza and is one of the personalities interviewed for the documentary film ''The Basque Ball'' (2003). 

==Music career and socio-political views==
Muguruza has taken part in more than twenty albums, and is one of the most important artists from the Basque Country. 

In 1983 he founded a fusion ska punk band called Kortatu with his brother Iñigo and drummer Treku Armendariz, among the first to popularise ska in Spain. In 1988 the group disbanded, but Fermin and Iñigo would come together again in 1990 to create  Negu Gorriak, along with Kaki Arkarazo, who had produced Kortatu's last records.

In Euskera and the need for social justice.

His socio-political views have created problems, especially in Spain outside the Basque Country, where he is often accused of being an apologist for ETA, the Basque separatist organisation. He denies such accusations, expressing a desire for a peaceful process of independence, which he considers on abeyance until both parts leave behind their prejudices. This position, which Muguruza frequently argues for during interviews, contrasts with his lyrics, which don't express criticism of ETA's violence — some of them, especially from his early career in the band Kortatu, show respect and estimation for ETA members: For instance, the song "''Sarri, Sarri''" (a Basque cover of Toots & the Maytals' "''Chatty chatty''") applauds the escape of two ETA members from prison. In interviews he has persistently denounced the actions of the Basque, Spanish and French governments and police corps as well as of Spanish nationalist groups. In an international level, Fermin Muguruza holds acute left-wing views that lead him to criticize the U.S. government, corporations and the globalization process, all of which he denounces as imperialistic and homogenizing. 

In an interview with Freemuse, Muguruza speaks about his experience as a musician under the Franco regime and the democracy of today.  When Muguruza performed in concerts with Franco in power, fascists would come to his concerts with bombs, threatening him and his Basque hip-hop music.  However, due primarily to the violent separatist organization ETA, Muguruza still experiences censorship within Spain for his political and social messages.  However, Muguruza still performs and makes music, saying “authorities are afraid of my music because it is a tool against the ignorance. And these authorities want the ignorance so that they can do what they want”. <ref>Muguruza, Fermin. Interview. FreeMuse. 4 Apr. 2007. 20 Apr. 2008 <http://www.freemuse.org/sw22104.asp>.</ref>

Musically, he has been influenced by the oppression that, in his opinion, Spain has over Basque Country and, although most of his lyrics are in Basque, his compositions are a melting pot of different cultures, with a big influence of Jamaican (Sisla, Anthony Bä ) and electronic music (especially drum and bass), which he commonly mixes over Basque instruments.  In his track “Euskal Herria Jamaika Clash”, Fermin Muguruza mixes Jamaican rhythms with sounds from Basque traditional musical instruments to produce unique musical hybrids that feature Basque heritage and culture. <ref>Muguruza, Fermin. "Euskal Herria Jamaika Clash." YouTube. 20 May 2006. 15 Apr. 2008 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2_BFcwdNtA8>.</ref>

==Discography==
===Kortatu===
*''Kortatu/Cicatriz/Jotakie/Kontuz Hi!'' (1985)
*''Kortatu'' (1985)
*''El estado de las cosas'' (1986)
*''Kolpez kolpe'' (1988)
*''Azken guda dantza'' (1988)