'''Jay David Bolter''' (* elektronischen Schreibens und des Hypertextes neben Vannevar Bush, Ted Nelson und Jakob Nielsen.

== Leben ==

Jay David Bolter promovierte 1977 (Ph.D. in ''Classics'') und erwarb 1978 einen ''Master''-Abschluss in Computer Science (M.S.), jeweils an der Universität von North Carolina.

Bolter forscht zur kulturellen und sozialen Bedeutung des Computers (''Turing's Man'', 1984) und zu Hypertext (''Writing Space'', 1991):
: ''"The term computer literacy has been taken to mean either the ability to operate a computer [...] or a technical knowledge of programming and concepts of computer science [...] we have been exploring a different and more general definition of computer literacy: the ability to read and write in the computer medium and an understanding of how the computer fits into the long tradition of the technologies of writing"''
: ''"Each element in this network may be a word, a sentence, a paragraph, and it may be related to as many other elements as the author or the reader (who is also an author) cares to define [...] The key is the electronic link, which allows us to build and explore trees or networks, to turn trees into hypertext"'' (Bolter in ''Writing Space'').

Seine aktuellen Interessenschwerpunkte liegen im Bereich der Annotation und der Remediation (''Remediation'', 2000).

Zusammen mit Michael Joyce entwickelte er das Hypertext-Syste Storyspace.

== Publikationen ==

'''Jay David Bolter''' (born Gutenberg." 

==Biography==
Bolter received his B.A. degree in Greek from Trinity College, in the Ph.D. in M.S. in University of North Carolina.  

Bolter received a number of prominent fellowships throughout his studies.  They included a fellowship at Universitat Gottingen, and a fellowship with the American Council of Learned Societies.

From 1979 until 1991, Jay David Bolter held a number of different faculty positions at the University of North Carolina.  In 1991 he moved to the Georgia Institute of Technology, where he remains today.

==Storyspace==
Along with John B. Smith and Michael Joyce, Bolter co-created Storyspace, a software program for creating, editing, and displaying hypertext fiction. It was developed to support hypertext fiction in particular, although it can also be used for organizing and writing fiction and non-fiction intended for print. 

Some of the notable hypertext fictions created in Storyspace include: Patchwork Girl''. 

Bolter has used Storyspace to revise several of his own books. More importantly, Storyspace provides facilities for writing and editing, which includes a map of the structure of the links, making it accessible for new users. Storyspace is currently being developed by Mark Bernstein of Eastgate Systems.

==Select works==
*Bolter, Jay David and Gromala, Diane. ''Windows and Mirrors: Interaction Design, Digital Art and the Myth of Transparency''. Cambridge:MIT Press, 2003. 