thumb|right|The Kaohsiung Museum of Fine Arts
'''Kaohsiung Museum of Fine Arts''' () is located in Gushan District (鼓山區), the northwestern district of Kaohsiung city (高雄).

It is founded by The Kaohsiung City Government and is administrated by the Kaohsiung Bureau of Cultural Affairs since 2003. It occupies about 8.15 acres and starts using in 1994. It’s the third public arts museum in Taiwan after the National Taiwan Museum of Fine Arts and the Taipei Fine Arts Museum were founded. In addition, the Kaohsiung Museum of Fine Arts is a part of the Neiweipi Cultural Park (內惟埤文化園區) , which occupies about 40 hectares. The first stage of Neiweipi Cultural Park’s construction started in 1989 and completed in 1994. During this phase, the Kaohsiung Museum of Fine Arts was completed. Afterwards, the developments of the entire area such as entrance plaza, sculpture park, and ecology park are kept carrying on and let the art museum itself become more attractive by the surroundings.

== The inner surroundings ==

*The first floor :
Lobby is an independent open space which contains a stationer, a service counter and computer information system.

Sculpture exhibition rooms. The height of Sculpture Hall is about four floors. Sunlight come in from a large skylight to make sculptures look more natural instead of being completely exanimate.

The galleries 101, 102, and 103 locate on the right side of the sculpture hall. They can be used for some general exhibitions and especially for special international exhibitions. The galleries 104 and 105 locate on the other side of the sculpture hall and the ceiling are designed with two stories high. This feature provides visitors with different angles such as looking down at works. These two rooms are usually used for displaying sculptures.

*The second floor :
Galleries on the second floor are mainly for exhibiting works which with large size.

*The third floor :
The main feature of galleries is that they can be used for displaying precious works such as calligraphy. This kind of works is supposed to be preserve in rooms which have special climate control. That is, the control system must keep moisture and temperature stable no matter how climate changes.

*The fourth floor :
The galleries here are mobile because they can be divided into different sizes and space.

== Outdoors space of the museum ==

thumb|240px|right|高雄市立美術館外觀
'''高雄市立美術館'''（Kaohsiung Museum of Fine Arts）簡稱'''高美館'''，它位於高雄市鼓山區「內惟埤文化園區」，該館自1983年當時的高雄市長許水德提議興建，經歷過三任市長十餘年的籌備與興建波折，終於在西元1994年6月正式開館，為臺灣第三座公立美術館。

高美館整體以一棟4層樓為展覽廳為主體的建築，另外有包括雕塑公園與園區服務中心共同構成內惟埤文化園區，在美術館主體為滿足機能與管理效率，在其空間規劃上，依不同功能設計空間單元，分別包括展覽區的前廳、雕塑大廳、十六間個展室與兩間多目的室、公共活動區如專門收藏藝術資料的圖書室、可容三百九十六席位之演講廳、美術資源教室、及多目的室等，另有工作人員使用之行政區及典藏區等空間等，其特色就是出入口各自獨立，易於分區管理、分時使用；在動線規劃上能把參觀與管理動線區分清楚，簡潔易於管理，使觀眾不至於陷入「博物館疲勞」的環境，是其空間的一大特色。<br />在行政組織上高美館原隸高雄市政府教育局，在2003年1月高雄市政府文化局成立後改隸於文化局，現有編制工作人員60位，是台灣館員編制人數最少的公立美術館，但其展覽館舍為台灣第二大，為使美術館有效的經營，該館致力開發社會資源的投入，其中該館的博物館志願服務者協助美術館負擔許多工作，堪稱台灣博物館界運用志工的典範，也因為志願服務者的支持，讓美術館得以發揮其功能。近年來該高美館館為使美術教育落實於兒童生活，在2004年在內惟埤文化園區服務中心設置附屬兒童美術館，此舉為台灣公立美術館之先驅。