thumb|300px|The burning of Jerome of Prague, [[Foxe's Book of Martyrs|John Foxe's Book of Martyrs (1563)]]
'''Jerome of Prague''' (''Jeroným Pražský'' in Czech, realism (as opposed to nominalism) and from then on Wyclifism and realism were charges which were constantly getting him into trouble. In 1403 he went to Jerusalem, in 1405 to Paris. There he took his Master's degree, but Jean Gerson drove him out. In 1406 he took the same degree at the University of Cologne, and a little later at the University of Heidelberg. 

He was no safer in Prague, to which he returned, and where, in 1407, he took the same degree. In that year he returned to Oxford, but was again compelled to flee. During 1408 and 1409 he was in Prague, and there his pronounced Czech preferences aroused opposition to him in some quarters. Early in January of 1410, he made a cautious speech in favour of Wyclif's philosphlical views, and this was cited against him at the Council of Constance four years later. In March of 1410, a Papal Bull against Wyclif's writings was issued, and on the charge of favouring them, Jerome was imprisoned in Vienna, but managed to escape to Moravia. For this he was excommunicated by the bishop of Kraków. Returned to Prague, he appeared publicly as the advocate of Hus. In 1413 he was at the courts of Poland and Lithuania, making a deep impression by his eloquence and learning. 

In Kraków, he was publicly examined as to his acceptance of the forty-five articles which the enemies of Wyclif had made up from Wyclif's writings and which they asserted represented Wyclif's heretical teachings. Jerome declared that he rejected them in their general tenor. When, on October 11 1414, Hus left for the Council of Constance, Jerome assured him that if needed, he would come to his assistance. This promise he faithfully kept, for on April 4 1415, he arrived at Constance. As he had, unlike Hus, come without a safe-conduct, his friends persuaded him to return to Bohemia. But on his way back he was arrested in Hirschau on April 20 and taken to Sulzbach, where he was imprisoned, and was returned to Constance on May 23, and immediately arraigned before the council on the charge of fleeing a citation &mdash; one having been really issued against him, but as he was away at the time he was ignorant of it. 

His condemnation was predetermined in consequence of his general acceptance of the views of Wyclif, and also because of his open admiration of Hus. Consequently he had not a fair hearing. His imprisonment was so rigorous that he fell seriously ill and so was induced to recant at public sessions of the council held on September 11 and September 23 1415. The words put into his mouth on these occasions made him renounce both Wyclif and Hus. The same physical weakness made him write in Bohemian letters to the king of Bohemia and to the University of Prague, which were declared to be entirely voluntary and to state his own opinions, in which he announced that he had become convinced that Hus had been rightfully burned for heresy. But this course did not secure his liberation nor decrease the likelihood of his condemnation. On May 23 1416, and on May 26, he was put on trial by the council. On the second day he boldly recanted his recantation, and so on May 30 he was finally condemned and immediately thereafter burned.

thumb|Verbrennung des Hieronymus von Prag.
'''Hieronymus von Prag''' (* um 1365 in böhmischer Gelehrter und Mitbegründer der hussitischen Bewegung, in einigen Ansichten sogar radikaler als Jan Hus selbst; es war ihm dabei ein wesentliches Anliegen, eine mögliche Kirchenreform auf Grundlage der ursprünglichen Überlieferung durchzuführen.

Außerdem war er ein Anhänger von John Wyclif und involviert ins Kuttenberger Dekret von 1409. Um die Grundgedanken der Reform zu verbreiten, unternahm Hieronymus zahlreiche Reisen - so auch in das Königreich Polen - Litauen, wo er wahrscheinlich im Jahre 1413 mit Vertretern der Orthodoxen Kirche in Kontakt kam.

Als Jan Hus auf dem Konstanzer Konzil verhaftet wurde, eilte Hieronymus nach Konstanz, um ihm zu helfen. Als er erfuhr, dass er auch verhaftet werden sollte, machte er aber kehrt, wurde aber dennoch in Bayern kurz darauf verhaftet. Vor der sicheren Gewissheit des Scheiterhaufens widerrief er seine Aussagen, weshalb er zunächst nur zu lebenslanger Haft verurteilt wurde. Kurz darauf distanzierte er sich wiederum von seinem Widerruf und wurde schließlich 1416 in Konstanz verbrannt.

==Biographie==
* František Šmahel: Jeroným Pražský, Prag 1966
* František Šmahel: Univerzitní kvestie a polemiky Mistra Jeronýma Pražského, Acta Universitatis Carolinae Pragensis - Historia Universitatis Carolinae Pragensis 22, 1982
* Richard Friedenthal: Jan Hus. Der Ketzer und das Jahrhundert der Revolutionskriege.München 1984, , Seiten 199 - 312