{{Infobox_Vice_President
| name=Alexander Hamilton Stephens
| nationality=American
| image=Alexander-Stephens-CSVP.jpg
| order=Vice President of the Confederate States
| term_start=February 11, 1861
| term_end=May 11, 1865
| predecessor=''Office instituted''
| successor=''Office abolished''
| birth_date=
| birth_place=Taliaferro County, Georgia
| death_date=
| death_place=Atlanta, Georgia
| spouse=
| profession=Lawyer
| party=Whig, Democratic
| president=Jefferson Davis
}}
:''This is an article about the Confederate Vice President. For the shipbuilding company, see Alexander Stephen and Sons
'''Alexander Hamilton Stephens''' (Georgia. He was U.S. Representative from Georgia (both before the Civil War and after Reconstruction) and as Governor of Georgia from 1882 until his death in 1883.

==Early life and career==
Stephens was born on a farm near Crawfordville, Presbyterian minister Athens, where he was roommates with Crawford W. Long and a member of the Phi Kappa Literary Society. He graduated at the top of his class in 1832. 

After an unhappy couple of years teaching school, he pursued legal studies, passed the bar in 1834, and began a successful career as a lawyer in Crawfordville. During his 32 years of practice, he gained a reputation as a capable defender of the wrongfully accused. None of his clients charged with capital crimes were executed. One notable case was that of a black slave woman accused of attempted murder. Stephens volunteered to defend her. Despite the circumstantial evidence presented against her, Stephens persuaded the jury to acquit the woman, thus saving her life.

Stephens suffered from illness and disease throughout his life; he weighed only 96 pounds. But he was a skillful lawyer and wonderful orator. While his voice was described as shrill and unpleasant, at the beginning of the Civil War a northern newspaper described him as "the Strongest Man in the South" because of his intelligence, judgment, and eloquence. His generosity was legendary. His house, even when he was governor of Georgia, was always open to travelers or tramps. He personally financed the education of over a hundred students, black and white, male and female. So prodigious was his charity, that he died virtually penniless.

As his wealth increased, Stephens began acquiring land and slaves. By the time of the Civil War, Stephens owned 34 slaves and several thousand acres. Stephens entered politics in 1836,   when he was elected to the Georgia House of Representatives. He served there until 1841. in 1842, he was elected to the Georgia State Senate.

==Congressional career==
thumb|left|200px|Alexander Stephens
In Whig, in a special election to fill the vacancy caused by the resignation of Unionist, in Democrat. He served from October 2, 1843 to March 3, 1859, in the 28th Congress through the 35th Congress.
 
As a national lawmaker during the crucial two decades before the Civil War, Stephens was involved in all the major sectional battles. He began as a moderate defender of slavery, but later accepted all of the prevailing Southern rationales used to defend the institution.

Stephens quickly rose to prominence as one of the leading Southern Whigs in the House. He supported the annexation of President in 1848. Both were chagrined and angered when Taylor proved less than pliable on aspects of the Compromise of 1850.  Stephens and Toombs both supported the Compromise of 1850, and then returned to Georgia to secure support for the measures at home. Both men were instrumental in the drafting and approval of the Georgia Platform, which rallied Unionists throughout the Deep South.

By this time, Stephens had departed the ranks of the Whig party&mdash;its northern wing proving inimical to what he regarded as non-negotiable Southern interests. Back in Georgia, Stephens, Toombs, and Democratic Representative Constitutional Union Party. The party overwhelmingly carried the state in the ensuing election and, for the first time, Stephens returned to Congress no longer a Whig. Stephens spent the next few years as a Constitutional Unionist, essentially an independent. He vigorously opposed the dismantling of the Constitutional Union party when it began crumbling in 1851. Political realities soon forced the Union Democrats in the party to affiliate once more with the national party, and by mid-1852, the unnatural combination of Democrats and Whigs, which had formed a "party" behind the Compromise, had come undone. 

The sectional issue surged to the forefront again in Senator Stephen A. Douglas moved to organize the Nebraska Territory, all of which lay north of the Missouri Compromise line, in the Kansas-Nebraska Act. This legislation aroused fury in the North because it applied the popular sovereignty principle to the Territory, thereby negating the Missouri Compromise. Had it not been for Stephens, the bill would have probably never passed in the House. He employed an obscure House rule to bring the bill to a vote. He later called this "the greatest glory of my life."

From this point on, Stephens voted with the Democrats. Not until after the Congressional elections of 1855 could Stephens be properly called a Democrat, although even then he never officially declared it. In this move, Stephens broke irrevocably with many of his former Whig colleagues. When the Whig Party disintegrated after the election of 1852, most Whigs flocked to the short-lived Know-Nothing Party. But Stephens fiercely opposed the Know-Nothings both for their secrecy and their anti-immigrant and anti-Catholic position.

Despite his late arrival to the Democratic Party, Stephens quickly rose. He even served as President Buchanan's floor manager in the House during the fruitless battle for the Lecompton Constitution for Kansas Territory in 1857. He was instrumental in framing and passing the so-called English bill after it became clear that Lecompton would never pass. 

Worn out and disgusted, Stephens did not seek re-election to Congress in 1858. As sectional peace eroded during the next two years, Stephens became increasingly critical of southern extremists. Although virtually the entire South had spurned Douglas as a traitor to Southern Rights (because he had opposed the Lecompton Constitution and broken with Buchanan), Stephens remained on good terms with the presidential electors in the election of 1860.

==Vice President==
thumb|left|330px|The original [[Confederate States of America#Executive|Confederate Cabinet. L-R: John H. Reagan and Robert Toombs.]]
In Republicans were a minority in Congress (especially in the Senate) and, even with a Republican President, would be forced to compromise just as the two sections had for decades. And, because the Supreme Court had voted 7–2 in the Dred Scott case, it would take decades of Senate-approved appointments to reverse it. He voted against secession in the convention, but asserted the right to secede if the federal government continued allowing northern states to nullify the Confederacy.  He took the oath of office on February 11, 1861, and served until his arrest on May 11, 1865. Vice President Stephens officially served in office eight days longer than President Jefferson Davis; he took his oath seven days before Davis' inauguration and was captured the day after Davis.

thumb|right|230px|Alexander Stephens in his later years.
On the brink of the Civil War, on March 21, 1861, Stephens gave his famous Cornerstone Speech in Savannah, Georgia. In it he declared that slavery was the natural condition of blacks and the foundation of the confederacy.

In 1862, Stephens first publicly expressed his opposition to the Davis administration.<ref></ref> Throughout the war he denounced many of the president's policies, including conscription, suspension of the writ of ''habeas corpus'', impressment, various financial and taxation policies, and Davis' military strategy.

thumb|200px|Alexander Hamilton Stephens
'''Alexander Hamilton Stephens''' (* Crawfordsville, US-amerikanischer Politiker und von 1861 bis 1865 der Konföderierten Staaten von Amerika.

Alexander H. Stephens studierte bis 1832 an der Universität von Georgia, die damals noch Franklin College hieß, und wurde Lehrer. Kurz darauf studierte er Rechtswissenschaft, die er als erster in seinem Abschlussjahrgang abschloss, bekam 1834 seine Zulassung als Anwalt und ließ sich 1834 in Crawfordsville als Anwalt nieder, wo er auch gleichzeitig politisch aktiv war. Schon 1836 wurde er in die Regierung von Georgia gewählt. 1843 bekam er als Mitglied der Whig Partei einen Sitz im US-Repräsentantenhaus, schloss sich aber später der Demokratischen Partei an. Stephens stimmte 1854 für den US-Präsidenten. 1859 schied er aus dem Kongress, weil er die extremen Ansichten der Sklavenhalterpartei nicht billigte, wie er 1861 auch anfangs gegen die Sezession war. Dennoch ließ er sich zum Vizepräsidenten der Konföderierte Staaten von Amerika wählen und bekleidete diesen Posten bis zu deren Untergang 1865. Durch Maßnahmen der Regierung von Jefferson Davis kam es zum Bruch mit dem Präsidenten. Er ging zurück nach Georgia, wo er ein Verfechter von Joseph E. Brown, Gouverneur von Georgia, wurde. Dort sabotierte er viele der Beziehungen der CS-Regierung zu diesem Staat. 1862 wurde er zum Führer der Opposition im CS-Senat. Zusammen mit Robert Mercer Taliafero Hunter, CS-Senator, und John Archibald Campbell, stellvertretender CS-Kriegsminister, nahm er am 3. Februar 1865] als Delegierter an der erfolglosen Wade Hampton Konferenz mit Abgesandten der Union zur Beendigung des Bürgerkrieges teil.

Am 11. Mai 1865 wurde er auf seinem Besitz in Georgia auf Befehl der Nordstaaten verhaftet und nach Fort Warren bei Boston gebracht, nach sechs Monaten aber freigelassen. Daraufhin ließ er sich in Atlanta, Georgia nieder.

1872 bis 1877 war er wieder demokratisches Mitglied im Kongress und bemühte sich um die Versöhnung der Parteien. Im Gegensatz zu Jefferson Davis hat er seine Staatsbürgerschaft wohl nicht verloren.
1882 wurde er Gouverneur von Georgia.

''Siehe auch:'' Liste der Gouverneure von Georgia