thumb|250px|José II

'''José II''' (imperador do Francisco I e de Maria Teresa. A sua acção governativa valeu-lhe o título de "déspota esclarecido". Foi amigo dos Enciclopedistas e dos Fisiocratas. 

Em 1760 casou com Isabel de Parma que faleceu três anos depois. A sua mãe obriga-o a casar com Maria Josefa da Baviera, que morre em 1767, sem dar um filho a José.

Com a morte do pai, em 1765, recebe o título de Imperador, mas só exerce plenamente o poder depois da morte de sua mãe em 1780, tendo praticado com ela a co-regência. Durante o período da co-regência dedica-se a viajar pelos estados austríacos e pelo estrangeiro.

Entre as primeiras reformas que empreendeu encontra-se a centralização administrativa do Império através da supressão dos órgãos colegiais e da criação de uma chancelaria com vastos poderes. 

Na economia, José II praticou políticas próximas do colbertismo. Procedeu-se a uma cadastro das terras, construiu-se uma rede de estradas e fomentaram-se as indústrias, sobretudo na Boémia. 

Através do Édito de Tolerância de 1781 concedeu a liberdade de culto a todos os cristãos, embora os protestantes não obtivessem todos os direitos. Os judeus deixaram de ser obrigados de trazer sinais distintivos nas roupas e puderam frequentar as universidades. 

Apesar de muito apegado ao catolicismo, não hesita em colocar a Igreja sob sua autoridade, exercendo uma política religiosa autónoma de Roma que ficou conhecida por "josefismo". Suprimiu as ordens contemplativas e vendeu os bens destas em proveito das obras assistenciais (1781), fez com que os clérigos seculares se tornassem funcionários civis e instituiu seminários estatais. Limita o culto das relíquias, os feriados e as peregrinações.

{| align="right"
|-'
|
{{Infobox Monarch
| name            =Joseph II
| title           =Holy Roman Emperor
| image           =150px
| caption         =
| reign           =1765 - 1790
| coronation      =
| othertitles     =King of Hungary<br>King of Croatia and Slavonia<br>King of Bohemia<br>Archduke of Austria<br>King of Italy
| full name       =Joseph Benedikt August Johannes Anton Michael Adam
| predecessor     =Francis I
| successor       =Leopold II
| consort         =i) Isabella of Parma<br>ii) Maria Josepha of Bavaria
| issue           =Maria Theresia<br>Maria Christina
| royal house     =House of Habsburg-Lorraine
| father          =Francis III Stephen, Duke of Lorraine
| mother          =Maria Theresa of Austria 
| date of birth   =March 13, 1741 
| place of birth  =
| date of death   =
| place of death  =Vienna
| date of burial  =
| place of burial =Imperial Crypt
|}}
|-
|

|}

'''Joseph Benedikt August Johannes Anton Michael Adam''' (Habsburg lands from 1780 to 1790. He was the eldest son of Empress Maria Theresa and her husband, Francis I. Joseph was a proponent of enlightened absolutism. 

He is known by the names in the languages of his territories: German: '''Joseph II.''', Dutch: '''Jozef II''', Italian: '''Giuseppe II''', Czech: '''Josef II''', Slovak: '''Jozef II''', Slovenian: '''Jožef II''' Romanian: '''Iosif al II-lea''', Hungarian: '''II. József''', Croatian: '''Josip II.''', Polish: '''Józef II'''.

==Heir and co-regent==
Joseph was born in the midst of the early upheavals of the War of the Austrian Succession. Maria Theresa gave orders that he was only to be taught as if he were amusing himself; the result was that Joseph acquired a habit of crude and superficial study. His real education was given to him through the writings of Voltaire and the Encyclopedists, and by the example of Frederick the Great. His useful training was conferred by government officials, who were directed to instruct him in the mechanical details of the administration of the numerous states composing the Austrian dominions and the Empire. 

He was made a member of the constituted council of state (''Staatsrat'') and began to draw up minutes (to which he gave the name of "Reveries") for his mother to read. These papers contain the germs of his later policy, and of all the disasters which finally overtook him. He was a friend to religious toleration, anxious to reduce the power of the church, to relieve the peasantry of feudal burdens, and to remove restrictions on trade and knowledge. In these, he did not differ from Frederick, Catherine of Russia, or his own brother and successor Leopold II, all enlightened rulers of the 18th century stamp. He was a great influence on serfs but that did not last after his death.

Where Joseph differed from great contemporary rulers, and where he was very close akin to the Jacobins, was in the fanatical intensity of his belief in the power of the state when directed by reason, of his right to speak for the state uncontrolled by laws, and of the sensibility of his rule. He had also inherited from his mother the belief of the house of Austria in its "august" quality and its claim to acquire whatever it found desirable for its power or profit. He was unable to understand that his philosophical plans for the moulding of mankind could meet with pardonable opposition. 

Joseph was documented by contemporaries as being impressive, but not necessarily likeable. In 1760, his arranged consort, the well educated Vergennes, who met Joseph when he was travelling incognito in 1777, judged him to be "ambitious and despotic."

left|thumb|[[Archducal hat of Joseph II, made 1764 in Vienna of gold-coated silver. Now in the Schatzkammer.]]
Until the death of his mother in 1780, Joseph was never quite free to follow his own instincts. After the death of his father in 1765, he became emperor and was made co-regent by his mother in the Austrian dominions. As emperor, he had no real power, and his mother had resolved that neither her husband nor her son should ever deprive her of sovereign control in her hereditary dominions. Joseph, by threatening to resign his place as co-regent, could induce his mother to abate her dislike for religious toleration. He could and did place a great strain on her patience and temper, as in the case of the first partition of Bavarian War of 1778&ndash;1779, but in the last resort, the empress spoke the final word.

During these wars, Joseph traveled much. He met Neisse in 1769, and again at Count Kaunitz, whose conversation with Frederick may be said to mark the starting point of the first partition of Poland. To this and to every other measure which promised to extend the dominions of his house, Joseph gave hearty approval. Thus, he was eager to enforce Austria's claim on Maximilian Joseph in 1777. In April of that year, he paid a visit to his sister the queen of France, Marie Antoinette of Austria, traveling under the name of "Count Falkenstein." He was well received and much flattered by the Encyclopedists, but his observations led him to predict the approaching downfall of the French monarchy, and he was not impressed favorably by the French army or navy.

In 1778, he commanded the troops collected to oppose Frederick, who supported the rival claimant to Bavaria. Real fighting was averted by the unwillingness of Frederick to embark on a new war and by Maria Theresa's determination to maintain peace. In April 1780, Joseph paid a visit to Catherine II of Russia, against the wish of his mother.

As the son of Francis I, Joseph succeeded him as titular Duke of Lorraine and Bar, which had been surrendered to France on his father's marriage, and titular King of Jerusalem and Duke of Calabria (as a proxy for the Kingdom of Naples).

==Joseph as ruling emperor==
The death of Maria Theresa on Patent of Tolerance (1781) providing limited guarantee of freedom of worship, the promotion of unity by the compulsory use of the German language&mdash;everything which from the point of view of 18th century philosophy, the Age of Enlightenment, appeared "reasonable"&mdash;were undertaken at once. He strove for administrative unity with characteristic haste to reach results without preparation.

His anticlerical and liberal innovations induced Pope Pius VI to pay him a visit in July 1782. Joseph received the pope politely and showed himself a good Catholic, but refused to be influenced. On the other hand, Joseph was very friendly to Freemasonry, as he found it highly compatible with his own Enlightenment philosophy, although he apparently never joined the Lodge himself. Joseph's feelings towards religion are reflected in a witticism he once spoke in Paris. While being given a tour of the Sorbonne's library, the archivist took Joseph to a dark room containing religious documents, and lamented the lack of light which prevented Joseph from being able to read them. Joseph put the man at rest by saying "Ah, when it comes to religion, there is never much light." Thusly, Joseph was undoubtedly a much laxer Catholic than his mother, perhaps even to the point of being Catholic in name only simply because it was a requirement for the throne.

Multiple interferences with old customs began to produce unrest in all parts of his dominions. Meanwhile, Joseph threw himself into a succession of foreign policies, all aimed at aggrandisement, and all equally calculated to offend his neighbours&mdash;all taken up with zeal, and dropped in discouragement. He endeavoured to get rid of the Flemish subjects from the navigation of the Fürstenbund, organized by Frederick II of Prussia.

In addition, Joseph abolished serfdom in 1781. Later, in 1789, he decreed that peasants must be paid in cash payments rather than labor obligations. These policies were violently rejected by both the nobility and the peasants, since their barter economy lacked money.

Also he abolished the death penalty in 1787 and it remained until 1795.

Finally, Joseph joined Russia in an attempt to pillage the Ottoman Empire. It began on his part in an unsuccessful and discreditable attempt to surprise Belgrade in time of peace, and was followed by the ill-managed campaign of 1788. He accompanied his army, but showed no capacity for war; the low point of this campaign was the extraordinary incident known as the Battle of Karansebes, in which the Austrian army ran away from an imaginary Ottoman army.

In November 1788, he returned to Vienna with ruined health, and during 1789, was a dying man. The concentration of his troops in the east gave the discontented Belgians an opportunity to revolt. In Hungary, the nobles were in all but open rebellion, and in his other states, there were peasant risings and a revival of particularistic sentiments. Joseph was left entirely alone. His minister Kaunitz refused to visit his sick-room and did not see him for two years. His brother Leopold remained at Florence. At last, Joseph, worn out and broken-hearted, recognized that his servants could not, or would not, carry out his plans. On January 30, 1790, he formally withdrew almost all his reforms in Hungary, and he died on February 20, 1790. He is buried in tomb number 42 in the Imperial Crypt in Vienna. He asked that his epitaph read: "Here lies Joseph II, who failed in all he undertook."<ref>Norman Davies, ''Europe: A history'' p. 687</ref>

==Marriages==
thumb|right|300px|A medal minted during the reign of Josef II, commemorating his grant of religious liberty to [[Jews and Protestants.]]