thumb|right|200px|Position of the kohen's hands and fingers during the [[Priestly Blessing.]]

A '''kohen''' (or '''cohen''', Hebrew כּהן, "priest", pl. כּהנִים, '''kohanim''' or '''cohanim''') has a special status in Biblical Aaron, brother of Moses. Another term for the descendants of Aaron are the ''Aaronites'' or ''Aaronids''.

During the existence of the sacrificial offerings. The Orthodox and, to a lesser extent, in Conservative Jewish communities.

==Biblical origins==
The status of kohen was first conferred on Aaron, the brother of Moses, and his direct male descendants, by God () as an "everlasting office". During the 40 years in which the Jews wandered in the wilderness and until the Holy Temple was built in Jerusalem, kohanim performed their service in the portable Tabernacle (,,, ). Their duties involved offering the daily and sacrifices, collectively known as the ''korbanot'' in Hebrew, and blessing the people in a ceremony known as ''Nesiat Kapayim'' ("raising of the hands"), the ceremony of the Priestly Blessing. 

When the First and Second Temples were built, the kohanim assumed these same roles in these permanent structures, located on the biblical festivals all twenty-four were present in the Temple.

Because Aaron was a member of the Tribe of Levi, all kohanim are levites, as tribal membership passes via patrilineal descent. However, not all levites are kohanim. Most of the Temple service (i.e. the ''korbanot'') could be conducted only by kohanim. Non-kohen levites (i.e. all those who descend from Levi, the son of Jacob, but not from Aaron) provide a variety of other Temple roles, most notably providing music and songs (Psalms) to accompany the Temple ceremonies but also a variety of other duties including standing guard over the Temple and Temple Mount, construction, maintenance, and assisting the kohanim by washing their hands and feet before services. During the era of the Tabernacle, the levites were employed in caring for and transporting the Tabernacle between travel destinations.

===Qualifications and disqualifications===
In Yad, Hilchoth Klei HaMiqdash 5:15). There was no mandatory retirement age. Only when a Kohen became physically infirm could he no longer serve (see T.B. ibid., and Yad, Hilchoth Biath HaMiqdash 7:12, and Hilchoth Klei HaMiqdash 3:8).

Certain imperfections could disqualify a kohen from serving in the Temple. Since the Temple was a place of beauty and the services that were held in it were designed to inspire visitors to thoughts of repentance and closeness to God, a less than physically perfect kohen would mar the atmosphere. 

These blemishes include: 
#blindness
#lameness
#an excessively low nasal bridge (such that a straight brush could apply ointment to both eyes simultaneously)
#disproportionate limbs
#a crippled foot or hand
#eyebrows that grow profusely
#cataracts
#a white streak that transverses the junction between iris
#certain types of boils
#crushed testicles

This, however, is not a comprehensive list (, and Rashi, ibid.) A kohen who was afflicted with one of these imperfections was held unfit for service. However, should it be a correctable imperfection, the kohen would become eligible for service should the defect be corrected. At any time, he was permitted to eat of the holy food (same source as above, including adjacent verses and commentaries). In addition, kohanim with these blemishes would be assigned to secondary roles in the Temple outside of performing the service itself.

The kohanim were rewarded for their role in the Temple and their special status through 24 special "priestly gifts." These were:[http://www.cohen-levi.org/temple_studies/order_of_the_temple_service.htm]

*Gifts given in the Temple area were portions of:
#an animal brought as a sin-offering
#a bird brought as a sin-offering
#a burnt-offering
#an offering for uncertain guilt
#a peace offering
#the olive oil offering of a metzora
#the two loaves of bread brought on Shavuot
#the Showbread
#the ''Mincha'' offerings
#the Omer offering

*Gifts given within the walls of Jerusalem were:
#the firstborn of any domestic kosher animal
#the ''Bikkurim'' (first fruits)
#the inner organs of certain offerings
#the skins of certain offerings

*Gifts which could be given inside or outside Jerusalem were:
#''Terumah'' (a portion of the harvest)
#''Terumat Ma'aser'' (a tithe of the levite’s tithe)
#''Challah'' (a portion of dough)
#the first shearing of the sheep
#the right front leg, the jaw, and the stomach of all non-sanctified, ritually slaughtered domestic animals
#Pidyon HaBen (five silver shekels for the redemption of a firstborn Israelite son)
#a sheep or goat redeemed for a firstborn donkey
#a property or possession dedicated to the Temple without specifying to which use it is to be given
#inherited fields that were dedicated to the Temple and not reclaimed
#the theft repayment to a convert who has died, leaving no heirs.

Females were never allowed to serve in the Tabernacle or the Temple. They were permitted to consume or derive benefit from some of the 24 priestly gifts. If a kohen's daughter married a man from outside the kohanic line, she was no longer permitted to consume these priestly gifts. Conversely, the daughter of a non-priest who married a kohen took on the same rights as an unmarried daughter of a kohen.

===Kohen Gadol===

In every generation when the Temple was standing, one kohen would be singled out to perform the functions of Kohen Gadol (High Priest). His main job was the Yom Kippur service, but he did offer a daily meal sacrifice, and he had the prerogative to supersede any kohen and offer any offering he chose.  A Kohen Gadol may only marry a virgin. Although Orthodox Judaism retains a procedure to select a Kohen Gadol when needed, there is no Kohen Gadol today, in the absence of a Temple.

==Ritual defilement==

The kohanim formed a holy order. For the purpose of protecting them against ritual defilement, the Torah imposed on the following rules for ritual purity, which are still maintained in Orthodox Judaism. 

*Kohanim are forbidden to come in contact with dead bodies, nor are they permitted to perform the customary mourning rites. They are commanded, however, to become defiled for their closest relatives: father, mother, brother, unmarried sister, child or wife. 
*A kohen is forbidden to enter any house or enclosure, or approach any spot, in which a dead body, or part of a dead body, may be found (, ; , ). Practical examples of these prohibitions include: not entering a cemetery or attending a funeral; not being under the same roof (i.e. in a home or hospital) as a dismembered organ. The exact rules and regulations of defilement are quite complex, but a cursory rule of thumb is that they may not enter a room with a dead person or come within a few feet of the body. Proximity to the corpse of a non-Jew is less serious and may only be an issue if actual contact is established.  Competent rabbinical authority should be consulted for each and every situation.
*A kohen is forbidden to touch anyone or anything that has been made ritually unclean through contact with the dead.
*A male kohen may not marry a divorcee, a prostitute, a convert, or a dishonored woman ( ). Any kohen who enters into such a marriage loses his priestly status while in that marriage. The kohen is not allowed to "choose to forgo his status" and marry a woman prohibited to him ().
*According to the Talmud, if a kohen marries in disregard of the above prohibitions, his marriage is still effective. Any children born of the union are legitimate and not ''mamzer''. However, these children are termed ''chalal'' ("defiled") and lose their kohen status permanently.
*The Kohen Gadol must marry a virgin.
*During the period of the Holy Temple, kohanim were required to abstain from wine and all strong drink while performing their priestly duties (; ). 

===Exceptions to rules of defilement===
The Talmud prescribes that if any kohen&mdash;even the Kohen Gadol&mdash;finds a corpse by the wayside, and there is no one else in the area who can be called upon to bury it, then the kohen himself must perform the burial (''meis mitzvah'').

The Talmud also orders the kohen to defile himself in the case of the death of a ''nasi'' (rabbinic leader of a religious academy). The Talmud relates that when Judah haNasi died, the priestly laws concerning defilement through contact with the dead were suspended for the day of his death.

===Current status of rules of defilement===
While all branches of Judaism which accept Halakha recognize the rules in principle, they differ considerably in their practical application.

* Haredi Judaism tends to interpret the rules strictly, and tends to resolve doubts in favor of preserving the purity of the priesthood. Haredi rabbis will often refuse to perform a prohibited marriage. The Israeli Rabbinate will also not perform such a marriage and hence a Kohen cannot legally marry a divorced or converted women (etc.) in the State of Israel, although a foreign marriage would be recognized. 
* Modern Orthodox Judaism recognizes the rules as being in full force, but in practice seeks leniencies with respect to some of the rules' strictures, and tends to resolve at least some doubts in favor of permitting a marriage. Modern Orthodox Jewish rabbis will often perform a prohibited marriage, but will not recognize the husband or their offspring as qualified Kohanim for ritual purposes.
* Conservative Judaism has issued an emergency ''takanah'' (rabbinical edict) temporarily suspending the application of the rules in their entirety, on the grounds that the high intermarriage rate in its community threatens the survival of Judaism, and hence that any marriage between Jews is welcomed. The ''takanah'' declares that the offspring of such marriages are to be regarded as Kohanim in good standing.

Areas where Haredi and Modern Orthodox approaches might create different results include situations where a woman has been raped, kidnapped or held hostage, descendants of converts whose Judaism status turned out to be subject to doubt, ambiguous prior dating histories, and other potentially ambiguous or difficult situations. 

Rape poses an especially poignant problem. The pain experienced by the families of Kohanim who were required to divorce their wives as the result of the rapes accompanying the capture of Jerusalem is alluded to in this Mishnah:

:If a woman were imprisoned by non-Jews concerning money affairs, she is permitted to her husband, but if for some capital offense, she is forbidden to her husband. If a town were overcome by besieging troops, all women of priestly stock found in it are ineligible [to be married to priests or to remain married to priests], but if they had witnesses, even a slave, or even a bondswoman, these may be believed. But no man may be believed for himself. Rabbi Zechariah ben Hakatsab said, "By this Temple, her hand did not stir from my hand from the time the non-Jews entered Jerusalem until they went out." They said to him: No man may give evidence of himself. Mishnah Ketubot 2:9

==Kohanim today==
Today, the status of kohen is assumed by anyone who has a family tradition to that effect. Until the eighteenth century in Europe, nineteenth century in Yemen) many kohanim could accurately trace their lineage back to a verifiable Kohen such as Ezra. Today, families may verify their priestly lineage via the tombstones of deceased ancestors, as the universal symbol of the hands arranged for the Priestly Blessing is a time-honored engraving for the tombstones of kohanim. Simply having the family name of "Cohen" (Cohn, Kogan, Kagan, etc.), or "Kahanowitz" etc. ("son of Cohen") is not proof enough, as emigration, assimilation and intermarriage have conferred the name on non-priestly individuals (and even non-Jewish descendants) as well.

Jerusalem, and Kohanim are regarded as retaining their original sanctity, and some elements of their original roles and responsibilities, and having a status of waiting in readiness for future service in a restored Temple. Other denominations of Judaism have different attitudes towards Kohanim, depending on their attitudes towards a Temple and Temple worship. 

In Orthodox Judaism and to some extent in Conservative Judaism, Kohanim maintain their special status in the following areas of modern life:

===Synagogue ''aliyah''===
After the destruction of the Second Temple and the suspension of sacrificial offerings, the formal role of priests in sacrificial services came to an end, whether temporary or permanent. However, kohanim retain a formal and public ceremonial role in synagogue prayer services, which were established as a substitute for or reminder of the sacrifices themselves ("Take with you words, and return unto the LORD; say unto Him: "Forgive all iniquity, and accept that which is good; so will we render for bullocks the offering of our lips..." ().

Every Monday, Thursday and Orthodox Conservative ones as well), a portion from the Torah is read aloud in the original Hebrew in front of the congregation. On weekdays, this reading is divided into three; it is customary to call a kohen for the first reading (''aliyah''), a levite for the second reading, and a member of any other Tribe of Israel to the third reading. On Shabbat, the reading is divided into seven portions; a kohen is called for the first ''aliyah'' and a levite to the second.

If a kohen is not present, it is customary in many communities for a levite to take the first ''aliyah'' "''bimkom Kohen''" (in the place of a Kohen) and an Israelite the second and succeeding ones. This custom is not required by Halakha (Jewish religious law), however, and Israelites may be called up for all aliyot. It is considered beneath the kohen's dignity to call him up for any of the other ''aliyot'', although he may be called for ''maftir'', which is not technically one of the seven ''aliyot''. In Orthodox Jewish circles, this custom has the status of law. The late 12th and early 13th century Rabbi Meir of Rothenberg ruled that in a community consisting entirely of Kohanim, the prohibition on calling Kohanim for anything but the first two and ''maftir'' ''aliyot'' creates a deadlock situation which should be resolved by calling women to the Torah for all the intermediate ''aliyot.'' Dr. Joel B. Wolowelsky, an author on the topic of the role of women in Judaism, has recently endorsed relying on this authority to permit the deliberate creation of ''minyanim'' composed entirely of Kohanim for the express purpose of giving women an opportunity to have an ''aliyah'' to the Torah in an Orthodox setting.<ref>Joel B. Wolowelsky, [http://traditiononline.org/news/article.cfm?id=100781 "On Kohanim and Uncommon Aliyyot"],  ''Tradition'' 39(2), Summer 2005</ref>

The Conservative Rabbinical Assembly's Committee on Jewish Law and Standards (CJLS), consistent with the Conservative movement's general view of the role of Kohanim, has ruled that the practice of calling a Kohen to the first aliyah represents a custom rather than a law, and that accordingly, a Conservative rabbi is not obligated to follow it. As such, in some Conservative synagogues, this practice is not followed.

===Priestly blessing===

All of the kohanim participating in an Orthodox prayer service must also deliver the Priestly Blessing, called ''Nesiat Kapayim'', during the repetition of the ''Shemoneh Esrei''. The text of this blessing is found in . They perform this rite by standing in the front of the synagogue, facing the congregation, with their arms held outwards and their hands and fingers in a specific formation. All Jews living in Israel and Sephardic Jews living outside of Israel deliver the Priestly Blessing daily; Ashkenazi Jews living outside of Israel deliver it only on Jewish holidays of biblical origin. 

Orthodox Judaism does not permit a ''bat kohen'' (daughter of a kohen) or ''bat levi'' (daughter of a levite) to participate in ''Nesiat Kapayim''. The reason is that ''Nesiat Kapayim'' ("the raising of the hands") performed today is a direct continuation of the Temple ritual, and should be performed by those who were authentically eligible to do so in the Temple.

Regarding the ritual of the Priestly Blessing, the Conservative Movement's CJLS has also approved two positions. One view holds that a ''bat kohen'' may deliver the blessing; another view holds that a ''bat kohen'' is not permitted to participate in the Priestly Blessing because it is a continuation of a Temple ritual which women were not eligible to perform (Rabbis Stanley Bramnick and Judah Kagen, 1994; and a responsa by the Va'ad Halakha of the Masorti movement, Rabbi Reuven Hammer, 5748). 

The majority of Reform Jews and Reconstructionist Jews consider all rules and ceremonies regarding the priesthood to be outdated. Many consider it to be anti-egalitarian, and thus discriminatory against Jews who are not kohanim. Therefore the honors given to the kohen during the Torah reading and in the performance of the Priestly Blessing are not observed in Reform or Reconstructionist Jewish communities. Many Reform and Reconstructionist Temples effectively forbid the practice of these laws and customs.

===Pidyon Haben===

Outside the synagogue, kohanim serve the unique distinction of leading the ''Pidyon Haben'', the symbolic Redemption of the First-born ceremony for first-born male sons. This mitzvah is based on the Torah commandment, "and you shall redeem all the firstborn of man among your sons." ()

In Orthodox and Conservative circles, this ceremony is conducted as part of a festive meal. The kohen first washes his hands and breaks bread, then calls for the father and the baby. The baby is typically brought in dressed in white and bedecked with gold jewelry, which the women in attendance contribute to beautify this mitzvah. The kohen then engages the father in a formal dialogue, asking him whether he prefers to keep his money or his son. At the end of this exchange, the father hands over five silver coins (There is a debate about how much this should be in contemporary money. According to some calculations, this would be equal to approximately 101 grams of silver. It is a general custom to give a value more than what this would be worth, to enhance the ''mitzvah''), and the kohen blesses him and his son. Though this ceremony should be conducted when the child is 29½ days (one lunar month) old, a first-born male who was never redeemed via ''Pidyon Haben'' may redeem himself later in life through a similar interaction with a kohen.

Ironically, the son of a Kohen (and, by tradition, the son of the daughter of a Kohen) need not be redeemed by the ''Pidyon HaBen'' rite.  See Pidyon_HaBen (Exemptions)

Orthodox Judaism requires that the ritual be performed by male kohanim.

According to the Conservative Jewish view, there are some rabbinic sources that allow women to perform this ritual, and thus a ''bat kohen'' (daughter of a kohen) may perform the ceremony for a newborn son. However, it is forbidden to perform this ceremony on a first-born daughter.

right|thumb|Position particulière des mains lors de la Birkat Hacohanim. Beaucoup de Cohanim choisissent de le faire figurer sur leur tombe afin d'attester de leur ascendance et leur statut.

D'après la Bible (Torah), '''Cohen''' (héb. כהן, plur. ''cohanim'', litt. "dédié, dévoué") est un '''titre''' conféré à Aaron, le frère de sacrifices et autres services dans le Temple de Jérusalem, sous l'autorité du Cohen Gadol (Grand Prêtre). Le premier ''Cohen Gadol'' fut Aaron lui-même.<br>Le Cohen Gadol tenait un rôle particulier, notamment dans l'office de Yom Kippour.

Depuis la destruction du Temple, le nom a continué à se transmettre de père en fils. Les cohanim continuent à jouir d'un statut personnel distinctif dans le judaïsme, et sont astreints à des règles et lois particulières, du moins dans les communautés orthodoxes.

Après l'instauration de la lecture de la Torah dans les synagogues, le terme de ''Cohen'' a continué à désigner dans le judaïsme orthodoxe, le statut de la première « montée » à la Torah qui revient symboliquement aux ''cohanim'', en remplacement des anciens sacrifices.

== Sources bibliques ==

La fonction de ''cohen'' (la ''kehouna''), fut conférée pour la première fois à Aaron, le frère de Tabernacle (Nombres 1:47–54; 3:5–13,44–51; 8:5–26), une structure portable. Leurs devoirs comprenaient les offrandes quotidiennes et des fêtes israélites, collectivement appelées ''korbanot'' en Hébreu, et la bénédiction du peuple au cours d'une cérémonie connue comme la ''Nessiat Kapayim'' (« levée des mains »), précurseur de la bénédiction sacerdotale actuelle. 

Lorsque le Premier et le festivals bibliques, les 24 groupes étaient tous présents au Temple.

Aaron étant un membre de la Tabernacle, les lévites avaient également pour rôle de le transporter entre les différentes étapes.

Selon l'opinion dominante, celle du judaïsme rabbinique orthodoxe, si l'ascendance du titre de Lévi ou Cohen est exclusivement '''patrilinéaire''', elle est conditionnée par l'appartenance préalable de l'individu au peuple juif laquelle appartenance ne se transmet que de façon strictement matrilinéaire. Ainsi, 
*Le fils de M Cohen (ou Kahn, ou Katz, etc.) et M. Lévy (ou Loewenstein, etc.) serait Juif et Lévite.
*Le fils de M Cohen et M. Dupont serait Juif mais ne serait pas ''Cohen''.
*Le fils de M. Cohen et M Durand ne serait ni Juif ni ''Cohen''. Leur enfant ne pourrait pas redevenir ''Cohen'' en se convertissant et s'il épouse une Juive, son enfant ne serait pas ''Cohen''.
Cependant, cette opinion pourrait sembler plutôt en contradiction avec les textes bibliques, lesquels attribuent ce titre aux descendants d'Aaron, sans distinctions. Au reste, la transmission patrilinéaire de l'appartenance aux tribus, attestée par les textes, est la seule suivie par les Samaritains; ceux-ci ignorent clairement les règles de la transmission matrilinéaire, qui prévaut dans le judaïsme rabbinique afin de déterminer qui est Juif. 

=== La lignée sacerdotale dans la Torah ===

Le premier à être nommé ''cohen'' dans la Shem, le fils de Noé (Genèse 14:18).

Lorsque aîné» commit, avec le reste d'Israël, le péché du Pinhas était déjà né à ce moment, il ne la reçut qu'après un acte de zèle, tuant le prince de la Nombres 31:11–12).

La prêtrise resta ensuite dans les mains des descendants d'Aaron. Le Livre des Chroniques (1 Chr. 12:27) mentionne les 3700 ''bnei Aaron'' menés par Yehoyada, père de Benayah, en tant que guerriers pour renforcer David à Hébron. À l'époque de la Torah, leur chef était Eléazar (Nomb. 3:32), mais après le règne de Salomon, il s'agira de Saddok (1 Chr. 27:17), et lorsque Ezéchiel, lui-même un ''cohen'', prophétise, c'est Saddok et non Aaron qui représente la légitimité sacerdotale. 

Une tradition rabbinique affirme que lorsque le Messie viendra, la prêtrise reviendra à l'aîné.

=== Qualifications et disqualifications ===

Aux temps bibliques, les ''cohanim'' prenaient leurs fonctions à 20 ans, et leur retraite à 60.

Certaines imperfections pouvaient disqualifier le ''cohen'' d'assurer sa ''kehouna'' dans le Temple. Le Temple étant en effet un endroit de beauté, et les offices s'y déroulant ayant pour fonction d'inspirer aux visiteurs des pensées de repentir et de proximité avec Dieu, un ''cohen'' « physiquement imparfait » aurait troublé l'atmosphère. 

Parmi les tares disqualifiant les prêtres de la prêtrise : 
#une cécité
#une boîterie
#une arcade nasale trop basse (telle qu'une brosse droite pourrait appliquer l'onction aux deux yeux en simultanéité)
#une disproportion de membres
#un pied ou une main estropiés
#des sourcils trop fournis
#une cataracte
#une traînée blanche traversant la jonction entre la iris
#certains types de furoncles
#des testicules broyés

Cette liste n'est cependant pas exhaustive (Lev. 21:18-20, et Rachi ad loc.) Un ''cohen'' affligé d'une de ces tares était déclaré inapte au service. Cependant, si l'imperfection était corrigible, le ''cohen'' redeviendrait éligible une fois celle-ci amendée. Il lui était permis, en tout temps, de consommer des aliments saints (mêmes sources que supra, ainsi que les versets adjacents et leurs commentaires). De plus, les ''cohanim'' affligés de ces tares se voyaient attribuer des rôles secondaires dans le Temple, en dehors des offices.

=== Les privilèges sacerdotaux ===

Les ''cohanim'' devant se dévouer au service divin et ne possédant pas de propriété terrestre, ils avaient droit à 24 ''dons aux cohanim'', qui leur étaient exclusivement réservées<ref>[http://www.cohen-levi.org/temple_studies/order_of_the_temple_service.htm Introduction to the concept of The Temple-Mikdash, its sources, its structure and function, and its importance for mankind<!-- Titre généré automatiquement -->]</ref>.

*Dons faits dans l'aire du Temple : 
#une portion d'un animal apporté comme offrande expiatoire
#une portion d'un oiseau apporté comme offrande expiatoire
#une portion d'une offrande à brûler
#une portion d'une offrande de « culpabilité douteuse » (c'est-à-dire non formellement établie)
#une portion d'une offrande de paix
#une portion de l'offrande d'huile d'olive d'une metzora
#les deux miches de pain apportées à Shavouot
#le pain de présentation
#les offrandes de ''Min'ha'' (farine)
#l'offrande du 'Omer

*Dons faits dans les murs de Jérusalem:
#le premier-né de tout animal domestique casher
#les ''Bikkourim'' (premiers fruits)
#les entrailles de cetaines offrandes
#les peaux de cetaines offrandes

*Dons pouvant être faits à l'intérieur comme à l'extérieur de Jérusalem:
#la ''Terouma'' (la prémices de la moisson)
#la ''Teroumat Ma'asser'' (une dîme sur la dîme du lévite)
#la ''halla'' (prémices de la pâte)
#la première tonsure du mouton
#la patte antérieure droite, la mâchoire, et l'estomac de tous les animaux domestiques rituellement abattus mais non sanctifiés
#le shekalim d'argent pour le rachat d'un fils aîné israélite)
#un mouton ou une chèvre rachetés pour un fils aîné de l'âne
#une propriété ou possession dédiée au Temple sans qu'on en ait spécifié l'usage au préalable
#des terrains hérités dédiés au Temple et non réclamés
#le repayement du "vol" pour un converti mort sans héritier.

Les femmes (''bnot cohen'', filles de cohen) ne furent jamais autorisées à servir dans le Tabernacle ni dans le Temple. Elles avaient le droit de consommer ou tirer bénéfice des 24 dons aux ''cohanim''. Cependant, si une fille de ''cohen'' épousait un non-''cohen'', elle perdait ce droit.

=== Le Cohen Gadol ===

À chaque génération, un ''cohen'' était désigné pour remplir les fonctions de ''service sacerdotal de ''Yom Kippour'', mais il réalisait également une offrande quotidienne de farine, et avait la prérogative de remplacer n'importe quel ''cohen'' pour n'importe quelle offrande ou sacrifice de son choix.

== Impureté rituelle ==

Les cohanim formaient un groupe saint, dont le rôle était d'appliquer les rites cultuels et sacrificiels énoncés dans la Torah. <br>Afin de les protéger contre l''''impureté rituelle''' (qui ne se confond pas avec l'hygiène corporelle), la Torah leur a imposé des règles de pureté rituelle stricte. Selon les Juifs orthodoxes, ces lois sont toujours d'application de nos jours.

* Un cohen n'a pas le droit de toucher de cadavres<ref>La Torah étant "''une Torah de vie''", la mort et ceux qui la portent sont considérés comme impurs, pour tous. Cependant, seuls les cohanim sont tenus d'être purs afin d'assurer leur office et d'assumer leur statut.</ref>. Il doit néanmoins se rendre impur pour ses 7 parents proches : père, mère, frère, sœur (uniquement si célibataire), fils, fille, conjoint. 
* Ceci interdit théoriquement aux cohanim d'apprendre l'tahara (purification) ou la levaya (enterrement)<ref>À propos des études de médecine, si les autorités orthodoxes y sont globalement défavorables, on note un assouplissement des tendances plus libérales, qui estiment qu'en l'absence du temple, tous les cohanim ne sont que ''présumés'' cohanim, et qu'ils ne devraient pas être privés de la mitzvah de sauver une vie.</ref>. 
*'''Un Cohen Gadol n'a pas le droit de se rendre impur, même pour ses parents proches''', mais en l'absence de Temple, il n'y a pas de Cohen Gadol de nos jours.
* Il est interdit à un cohen de pénétrer dans un lieu ou un périmètre dans lequel pourrait se trouver un cadavre ou une partie de cadavre (, ; ). Ceci lui interdit l'accès à un autorité rabbinique compétente pour déterminer la conduite à tenir au cas par cas. '''Une règle générale est d'éviter de se trouver à moins de deux mètres d'un cadavre'''. La proximité du cadavre d'un non-Juif porte à de moindres conséquences, et le problème ne se pose qu'en cas de contact avéré.
* Il est de coutume d'enterrer les ''cohanim'' au bord des cimetières ou au bord des allées afin de permettre à leurs proches ''cohanim'' de se rendre sur leur tombe (à une distance d'au moins ''quatre coudées'', c'est-à-dire deux mètres) sans risquer d'entrer dans le périmètre d'autres tombes, ce qui les rendrait rituellement impurs<ref>Le centre médical Hadassah a résolu ce problème, en dotant certains secteurs de doubles cloisons. Techniquement, le mortuarium et les chambres des patients peuvent donc être considérés comme ''deux bâtiments différents''</ref>.
* Il est interdit à un cohen de toucher quiconque ou quoi que ce soit qui a été rendu impur par contact avec  un mort.
*'''''Sont dispensés de ces règles''''' un enfant qui n'est pas en âge de comprendre son statut ni la particularité qu'il lui confère, la fille d'un cohen célibataire, l'épouse d'un cohen, qu'elle soit ou non elle-même fille d'un cohen.
* Un (homme) cohen ne peut se marier avec une femme divorcée, prostituée ou déshonorée (Lev. 21:7). Tout cohen outrepassant ces interdits perd son statut tant qu'il n'a pas divorcé. Il s'agit de situations involontaires, un cohen n'ayant pas le droit de se défaire volontairement de son héritage afin d'épouser une femme qui lui est prohibée (Lev. 21:6–7).
*Selon le Talmud, un cohen marié en dépit de ces interdictions ne voit pas son mariage invalidé, et ses enfants ne sont ni illégitimes, ni "bâtards" (''mamzer''). Toutefois, ils sont '''hallalim''<ref>Le rapport avec ''halal'' existe, mais il est lointain : l'islam considère comme permise une nourriture profane, non sacrée, tandis que le judaïsme entend par 'hallal "''désécré''". Toutefois, il n'y a là aucune intention péjorative</ref>, "vides" de leur statut de Cohen de façon permanente.
* Le Cohen Gadol doit épouser une vierge.
* Durant la période du Temple, les cohanim étaient priés de s'abstenir de boissons fortes et durant leur charge sacerdotale (Lev. 10:9; Ezéchiel 44:21). 

=== Exceptions aux règles d'impureté ===

Le Talmud prescrit à tout cohen—y compris au Cohen Gadol—qui trouverait un cadavre sur la route, et ne trouverait personne d'autre à portée pour l'enterrer, de l'enterrer lui-même ('''''met mitzvah''''').

Le Talmud raconte aussi que lorsque Rabbi Juda HaNassi décéda, les lois d'impureté rituelle au contact d'un cadavre furent suspendues pour la journée. Cette exception s'applique à la mort de tout ''Nassi'' ("président", dirigeant rabbinique du Sanhédrin, puis d'une académie religieuse).

== Les Cohanim de nos jours ==

De nos jours, le statut de ''cohen'' est assumé par quiconque possède une tradition familiale à cet effet. Jusqu'au  en Europe ( au Ezra. Cependant, l'émigration, l'assimilation, les mariages en dehors de la religion, etc. ont eu pour résultat de transmettre le patronyme à des individus non-cohanim, voire non-Juifs. L'un des moyens de retracer ou vérifier une lignée est de vérifier sur les pierres tombales des ancêtres qu'elles contiennent le symbole des mains arrangées pour la bénédiction sacerdotale.

Les ''cohanim'' maintiennent un statut privilégié dans les domaines suivants de la vie courante :

=== Montée à la Torah ===
Après la destruction du Second Temple et l'interruption des offrandes sacrificielles, le rôle formel des prêtres prit fin, et la fonction de Cohen Gadol disparut. Toutefois, ils conservèrent un rôle formel et cérémonial dans les offices de prières synagogaux, lesquels furent établis comme réminiscence des sacrifices eux-mêmes, ainsi que le Tanakh lui-même le suggérait (Osée 14:3 : "''Apportez avec vous des paroles, et revenez à l’Éternel; dites-lui : Pardonne toutes les iniquités, et reçois-nous favorablement ! '''Nous t’offrirons, au lieu de taureaux, l’hommage de nos lèvres'''''").

Chaque lundi, jeudi et orthodoxes, une portion de la Torah est lue en Lévi, la troisième à un Israël. À Chabbat, où la lecture comprend sept chapitres, le premier revient également à un Cohen (et la seconde à un Lévi).<br>Si l'assemblée ne comporte pas de Cohen, il est de coutume dans beaucoup de communautés d'appeler un Lévi pour la première aliya "''bimkom Cohen''" (à la place d'un Cohen), un Israël pour la seconde et ainsi de suite. Il est considéré indigne du rang d'un Cohen d'être appelé à toute autre ''aliya'' que la première, bien qu'il puisse lire le ''maftir'', qui n'est pas à proprement parler l'une des sept ''aliyot''. Dans le judaïsme orthodoxe, cette coutume a statut de loi.
<br>Le Rav Meïr de Rothenburg (Allemagne, 12 - 13 siècle) a décrété que dans un en état d'impureté).<ref>Joel B. Wolowelsky, [http://traditiononline.org/news/article.cfm?id=100781 "On Kohanim and Uncommon Aliyyot"], ''Tradition'' 39(2), Summer 2005</ref>

La coutume d'appeler un cohen à la première ''aliyah'' est généralement observée dans les communautés ''conservative'', sans avoir statut de loi. Le ''Rabbinical Assembly's Committee on Jewish Law and Standards'' (CJLS) a en effet décrété que les rabbins n'étaient pas obligés de s'y plier, et de fait, certaines synagogues ''conservative'' y dérogent.<br>Le CJLS a également décrété diverses positions quant à savoir si une ''bat cohen'' (fille d'un cohen) peut revendiquer lerôel honoraire du cohen dans les offices de prière synagogaux. Une position permet effectivement de donner préséance à une ''bat cohen'', ainsi qu'à une ''bat levi'' (fille d'un lévite) lors de la lecture publique de la Torah, qu'elles soient ou non mariées. De plus, leur statut ne devrait, selon ce décret, pas être déterminé par le lignage de leur époux, mais par leurs propres lignages paternels (Rabbi Joel Roth "The status of daughters of kohanim and leviyim for aliyot" 11/15/89). <br>Un autre rabbin estime que les femmes ne doivent pas recevoir de telles ''aliyot''. C'est cette position qui a été adoptée par l'ensemble du Mouvement Massorti (Rabbi Robert Harris, 5748).
<br>Pour finir, le CJLS enseigne que là où le comité légal a validé plus d'une position possible, la congrégation doit suivre les décisions de son propre rabbin.

=== La bénédiction sacerdotale ===