'''David Anthony Pirner''' (født i Green Bay i Wisconsin i 16. april 1964) og kjent som vokalisten i Soul Asylum. Dave Pirner bor i Minneapolis Minnesota.

Han lærte å spille trommer, og startet et punk band med sine venner Dan Murphy (gitar) og Karl Mueller (bass). Så begynte han å spille gitar og ble vokalisten. Grant Young ble med i bandet og spilte trommer. Mange mente at bandet (Soul Asylum) var slapt og dårlig. Etterhvert slo de gjennom med låtene Runaway Train og Black Gold, som hørte til albumet Grave dancer's union i 1992. Det ble solgt 2 millioner kopier av albumet. De byttet også ut Grant Young med Sterling Cambell. De sa at Grant ikke likte å dra på turnéer og at han lagde mye bråk.

Soul Asylum ble mer og mer populær. Dave Pirner begynte å hjelpe andre artister med å skrive sanger.
Så etter  de hadde lagd 5 album og vært på turneer, tok de en pause.
Da flyttet Dave til Orleans. han ville spille in en plate, men de andre i bandet kunne ikke komme ned der så da bestemte Dave seg for å lage sitt eget album. Han spilte inn sanger han hadde skrivd mens han var på turné med Soul Asylum.
Når han hadde tid dro han til studioet og spilte og sang inn sangene hans. Albumet heter "Faces and Names".
Dave Har også et barn sammen med Karen Brady, som heter Elijah Ray Pirner.

Etter 8 år begynte Soul Asylum med et nytt album.
dessverre så døde Karl Mueller av hals kreft som han har kjempet mot i mange år. han døde i hjemme sitt i Minneapolis den 17. juni 2005.
Han ble bare 41 år.
De fikk en ny bass spiller som heter Tommy Stinson og Michael Bland som spiller trommer, Dan og Dave er vokalistene og spiller gitar.

<!--  Commented out because image was deleted: right|frame|Dave Pirner (circa 2002) -->'''David Pirner''' is an American singer, best known for being the lead vocalist for the band Soul Asylum. 

==Biography==
Pirner was born on April 16, 1964 in Green Bay, Wisconsin. By the time he was 17, he was living and working in Minneapolis, Minnesota. Dave taught himself how to play the drums. By age 20, Dave started his career drumming with a punk band called Loud Fast Rules as part of the Minneapolis scene, together with Karl Mueller (bass) and Dan Murphy (guitar). When Pirner switched to singing and playing rhythm guitar, Pat Morley joined on drums. Pat was later replaced by Grant Young, and the band changed their name to Soul Asylum. At first, critics said the band was sloppy and erratic but at the same time captivating. The band achieved big-time success with the single "Runaway Train" off the 1992 album ''Grave Dancers Union''. The video for the song featured stills of missing children against the backdrop of a baby being kidnapped from a young mother. Their other big hit from the album was "Black Gold", and because of those two songs, the album went on to sell more than two million copies.

As Soul Asylum became more popular, Pirner decided to spread his talent around and started to do guest appearances on different albums of artists he greatly admired, such as Paul Westerberg, Mike Watt and The Autumn Defense. 

By 1999, Soul Asylum went into hiatus, after making 1998's ''The Silver Lining'' on Legacy Recordings, which was dedicated to the life and memory of Karl. About half the songs on the album were recorded with the late bassist, such as "Lately", "Slowly Rising" and "Standing Water". The first hit from this album was "Stand Up And Be Strong". Since last year, Dave Pirner has been cutting back on smoking and drinking. Soul Asylum is currently on tour with their new lineup, which consists of Dave Pirner on guitar and vocals, Dan Murphy on lead guitar, Michael Bland on drums and Tommy Stinson on bass (as well as John Fields standing in on bass and piano for Tommy).

Dave became famous for his personal life just as much for his music. Pirner dated movie star Backbeat''. A misunderstanding of the lyrical content in Primus's hit single "Kevin Smith's 1997 film ''Chasing Amy''. The song "Cant Even Tell" is featured in ''Clerks'', then they used the song "Misery" in Kevin Smith's most recent flick, ''Clerks II''.

In 2002 Dave released his first solo album entitled ''Faces & Names'' on Ultimatum Music.  He also contributed guest vocals on the song "Chillout Tent" in The Hold Steady's 2006 release, ''Boys and Girls in America''.

Pirner now resides in the post-Katrina Bywater neighborhood of New Orleans where he is part of a music collective doing recording and production work. 

Radio host Eddie Trunk said in an episode of Vh1 Classic turntables that Dave was a songwriter he marveled.