250px|thumb|right|Llyn Ogwen (near the summit of the Nant Ffrancon Pass), taken from the A5.
The '''Nant Ffrancon Pass''' in Conwy. The summit at 312 m. is at Pont Wern-gof about one-third of a mile beyond the eastern end of Llyn Ogwen. From here the road descends through Nant y Benglog to Lord Penrhyn in the late 18th Century and at Capel Curig in 1801 he built a coaching inn, which is now Plas y Brenin, the UK National Mountaineering Centre.  

Nant Ffrancon itself is a steep sided glacial valley dropping to Bethesda between the Glyderau and the Carneddau. The valley starts in Cwm Idwal carrying water from Llyn-y-Cwn through the Devil’s kitchen and Llyn Idwal to join the Ogwen Valley below the Ogwen Falls on Afon Ogwen. Unlike Lord Penrhyn’s road, which largely followed the valley floor, Telford carved much of his road out of the north-eastern slopes of the Nant Ffrancon, thereby encountering difficulties in construction and future maintenance. But this enabled Telford to observe a maximum grade of 1 in 14 along the whole route from London to Holyhead in order to facilitate the operation of horse drawn mail coaches throughout.

Dyffryn yn Lyn Ogwen a Chwm Idwal hyd at gyffiniau pentref Ffranc), ond nid yw pawb yn cytuno â'r esboniad.

==Daearyddiaeth==
Mae Nant Ffrancon o ddiddordeb daearegol mawr, gan ei bod yn enghraifft glasurol o ddyffryn a grewyd gan rewlif, ac yn dangos siâp "U" nodweddiadol y dyffrynnoedd hynny, gydag ochrau serth a gwaelod gwastad. Ar ochr ddwyreiniol y dyffryn mae llethrau Y Garn, Foel Goch a Mynydd Perfedd. Mae llawer o'r meini yn y dyffryn yn dangos tystiolaeth eu bod wedi eu symud gan y rhewlif yn ystod Oes yr Iâ. Er bod Afon Ogwen yn llifo ar hyd y dyffryn, nid yr afon a greodd y dyffryn yma. 

==Ffyrdd==
Mae priffordd yr Gapel Curig. Ceir ffordd gynharach sy'n dilyn ochr orllewinol y Nant. Cafodd yr hen ffordd ar hyd llwybr presennol yr A5 ei ail-wneud yn llwyr gan Borth Penrhyn, ger Bangor. Cyn hynny cafodd yr hen lwybr ei ddisgrifio gan yr hynafiaethydd Thomas Pennant fel "y llwybr mul gwaethaf yng Nghymru"!<ref>Alun Llywelyn-Williams, ''Crwydro Arfon'' (Cyfres Crwydro Cymru, 1959), t. 115-16.</ref>