The '''hippie trail''' is a term used to describe the journeys taken by hippies and others in the 1960s and 1970s from Europe, overland to and from eastern Asia.  One of the key motivations was the desire to travel as cheaply as possible, mainly to extend the length of time away from home, and so journeys were carried out by ''thumbing'' (hitchhiking), or cheap, private buses that travelled the route.  There were also trains which traveled part of the way, particularly across Eastern Europe, through Turkey (with a ferry connection across Lake Van) and to Tehran or east to Mashhad, Iran.  From these cities public or private transportation could be obtained.

== Typical route ==

Such journeys would typically start from countries in western Europe, often the cities of London or Amsterdam. Many from the US took Icelandic Airlines to Goa or Kathmandu being the usual destinations.  Kathmandu still has a road nicknamed ''Freak Street'' in memory of the many thousands of hippies who passed through.  An alternative route was from Turkey via Syria, Jordan, and Iraq to Iran and then east.  Further travel to southern India, Sri Lanka, and points east to Australia was also undertaken.

The overland suffered from political changes at the end of the 1970s. The Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan and the Shah was deposed by an Islamic revolution in Iran. Still, Sundowners and Top Deck pioneered a route through Baluchistan. Top Deck continued its trips throughout the Iran-Iraq war and later conflicts and took its last trip in 1998.

With a loosening of immigration in Iran the route has again become somewhat feasible, although conflicts in Iraq, Afghanistan and some parts of Pakistan make the route difficult to negotiate.

== Guides== 

The BIT Guide, a stapled-together "A4 bundle" providing information for travellers and updated by those already on the road, warned of pitfalls and places to see and stay. The first BIT Guide was produced by the BIT Information & Help Service in London in 1970. The BIT guide reached its peak under the control of legendary traveller Geoff Crowther, who arrived at BIT in 1972.  

The 1971 edition of The Whole Earth Catalog (''The Last Whole Earth Catalog'') devoted page 302 to the '''Overland Guide to Nepal'''.  The guidebook company Lonely Planet got its birth when its founders published writings from their overland trip, driving from the UK to Australia.  Paul Theroux wrote a classic account of the route in ''The Great Railway Bazaar'' (1975).

== Motivation == 

'''Hippie trail''' ist ein Ausdruck, der die Reiserouten der Hippies in den 1960ern und 1970ern von Europa über Land nach Ostasien beschreibt. 

Viele Reisende auf dem Hippie trail wurden durch Ideen wie "Rucksackreisende, obwohl bisweilen auch ältere Reisende oder Familien derartige Reisen unternahmen.

== Transportmittel ==
Eines der Kennzeichen war das Bestreben, so günstig wie möglich zu reisen, weshalb das Reisen per Anhalter populär war. Es gab günstige private Busverbindungen und öffentliche Zugverbindungen für die Streckenabschnitte durch Osteuropa, die Türkei nach Teheran oder Mashad in Iran. Vereinzelt fuhren Menschen jedoch die gesamte Strecke mit dem Auto.

== Route ==
Solche Reisen starteten normalerweise in verschiedenen Ländern Europas. Reisende aus den USA benutzten häufig die damals für besonders günstige transatlantische Flüge bekannten Icelandic Airlines und landeten in Luxemburg. Die weiteren Stationen beinhalteten etwa Istanbul, Teheran, Kabul und Peshawar mit den Endzielen Goa oder Kathmandu. Eine alternative Route war über die Türkei nach Syrien, Jordanien und den Irak nach Iran und dann weiter ostwärts.

In Kathmandu gibt es immer noch eine Straße mit dem Spitznamen "Freak Street", die an die tausenden Hippies, die damals durchreisten (und gelegentlich noch durchreisen), erinnert. Weitere Reisen nach Südindien, Sri Lanka und noch östlichere Ziele wurden ebenfalls unternommen.