right|thumb|[[René Descartes (1596&ndash;1650)]]
"'''Cogito, ergo sum'''" (philosophical statement used by Western philosophy.  The simple meaning of the phrase is that if someone is wondering whether or not he exists, that is in and of itself proof that he does exist.

Descartes's original statement was "Je pense donc je suis," from his ''Discourse on Method'' (1637).  He uses the Latin "Cogito ergo sum" in the later ''Principles of Philosophy'' (1644), Part 1, article 7: "Ac proinde hæc cognitio, ''ego cogito, ergo sum'', est omnium prima & certissima, quæ cuilibet ordine philosophanti occurrat.", by which time it had become popularly known as 'the "Cogito Ergo Sum" argument'.

== Predecessors ==
Although the idea expressed in ''Cogito ergo sum'' is widely attributed to Descartes, he was not the first to mention it. Plato spoke about the "knowledge of knowledge" (Greek ''noésis noéseós'') and Aristotle explains the idea in full width:
<blockquote>But if life itself is good and pleasant (...) and if one who sees is conscious that he sees, one who hears that he hears, one who walks that he walks and similarly for all the other human activities there is a faculty that is conscious of their exercise, so that whenever we perceive, we are conscious that we perceive, and whenever we think, we are conscious that we think, and to be conscious that we are perceiving or thinking is to be conscious that we exist... (''Nicomachean Ethics'', 1170a25 ff.)</blockquote>

De Civitate Dei'' writes "Si […] fallor, sum" ("If I am mistaken, I am") (book XI, 26), and also anticipates modern refutations of the concept. Another predecessor was Avicenna's "Floating Man" thought experiment on human self-awareness and self-consciousness.<ref name=Leaman>Seyyed Hossein Nasr and Oliver Leaman (1996), ''History of Islamic Philosophy'', p. 315, Routledge, ISBN 0415131596.</ref> Nevertheless, Descartes was original in expanding the idea as a defence against the growing scepticism of his time and using it as a foundation of his whole metaphysics.

==Introduction== 
The phrase ''Cogito ergo sum'' is not used in Descartes's most important work, the ''Discourse'', had been misleading in its implication that he was appealing to an inference, so he avoided the word ''ergo'' and wrote "that the proposition, ''I am, I exist,'' is necessarily true whenever it is put forward by me or conceived in my mind." (''Meditation'' II.)

At the beginning of the second meditation, having reached what he considers to be the ultimate level of doubt &mdash; his argument from the existence of a deceiving god &mdash; Descartes examines his beliefs to see if any have survived the doubt. In his belief in his own existence he finds it is impossible to doubt that he exists.  Even if there were a deceiving god (or an evil demon, the tool he uses to stop himself sliding back into ungrounded beliefs), his belief in his own existence would be secure, for how could he be deceived unless he existed in order to be deceived?

<blockquote>But I have convinced myself that there is absolutely nothing in the world, no sky, no earth, no minds, no bodies.  Does it now follow that I too do not exist? No. If I convinced myself of something [or thought anything at all] then I certainly existed. But there is a deceiver of supreme power and cunning who is deliberately and constantly deceiving me.  In that case I too undoubtedly exist, if he is deceiving me; and let him deceive me as much as he can, he will never bring it about that I am nothing so long as I think that I am something.  So, after considering everything very thoroughly, I must finally conclude that the proposition, ''I am, I exist,'' is necessarily true whenever it is put forward by me or conceived in my mind. (AT VII 25; CSM II 16&ndash;17)</blockquote>

There are three important notes to keep in mind here.  First, he only claims the certainty of ''his own'' existence from the first-person point of view &mdash; he has not proved the existence of other minds at this point.  This is something that has to be thought through by each of us for ourselves, as we follow the course of the meditations.  Second, he is not saying that his existence is necessary; he is saying that ''if he's thinking'', then necessarily he exists (see the instantiation principle). Third, this proposition "I am, I exist" is held true not based on a deduction (as mentioned above) nor on empirical induction, but on the clarity and self-evidence of the proposition.

Descartes does not use this first certainty, the ''cogito'', as a foundation upon which to build further knowledge; rather, it is the firm ground upon which he can stand as he works to restore his beliefs.  As he puts it:

<blockquote>Archimedes used to demand just one firm and immovable point in order to shift the entire earth; so I too can hope for great things if I manage to find just one thing, however slight, that is certain and unshakable. (AT VII 24; CSM II 16)</blockquote>

According to many of Descartes' specialists, including Étienne Gilson, the goal of Descartes in establishing this first truth is to demonstrate the capacity of his criterion &mdash; the immediate clarity and distinctiveness of self-evident propositions &mdash; to establish true and justified propositions despite having adopted a method of generalized doubt. As a consequence of this demonstration, Descartes considers science and mathematics to be justified to the extent that their proposals are established on a similar immediate clarity, distinctiveness, and self-evidence that present itself to the mind. The originality of Descartes' thinking, therefore, is not so much in expressing the cogito &mdash; a feat accomplished by other predecessors, as we have seen &mdash; but on using the cogito as demonstrating the most fundamental epistemological principle, that science and mathematics are justified by relying on clarity, distinctiveness, and self-evidence.

==Criticisms of the ''cogito''==
<!-- Follow the comments and the FIXME's. -->
There have been a number of criticisms of the ''cogito.'' The first of the two under scrutiny here concerns the nature of the step from "I am thinking" to "I exist." The contention is that this is a syllogistic inference, for it appears to require the extra premise: "Whatever has the property of thinking, exists," and that extra premise must surely have been rejected at an earlier stage of the doubt.<!-- FIXME "The" doubt? This doubt has not been referenced before. -->

It could be argued that "Whatever has the property of thinking, exists" is self-evident, and thus not subject to the method of doubt. This is because the instantiation principle states that: "Whatever has the property ''F,'' exists,"<!-- FIXME The instantiation principle is not about the kind of existence we're interested in. --> but within the method of doubt, only the property of thinking is indubitably a property of the meditator.<!-- FIXME Here comes this illustrious doubt again. --> Descartes does not make use of this defense, however; as we have already seen, he responds to the criticism by conceding that there would indeed be an extra premise needed, but denying that the ''cogito'' is a syllogism.<!-- Whether Descartes used a certain defense doesn't seem to matter, as long as he could have used it. --> Jaakko Hintikka offered a non-syllogistic interpretation.  "I exist" is immune to Descartes' method of doubt because it is impossible to be mistaken about one's own existence.<!-- FIXME Jaakko Hintikka says that it's impossible to mistaken about one's own existence. Why? Because Jaakko Hintikka says that it's impossible to mistaken about one's own existence. Non sequitur. --> If we do not exist then we cannot be mistaken, so we might as well believe we do.

'''我思う、ゆえに我あり'''（われおもう、ゆえにわれあり）はルネ・デカルトが自著「方法序説」の中で提唱した有名な命題である。原語はフランス語で''''''. ラテン語訳で''''''（コーギトー・エルゴー・スム、'''' - 私は思う、'''' - それ故に、'''' - 私は在る）、英語では "''I think, therefore I am''"。 ちなみに、ラテン語訳はデカルトと親交のあったメルセンヌ神父によるもので、デカルト自身のテクストにはラテン語での記述は登場していない。

== 解説 ==
一切を疑うべしDe omnibus dubitandumという方法的懐疑により、自分を含めた世界の全てが虚偽だとしても、まさにそのように疑っている意識作用が確実であるならば、そのように意識しているところの我だけはその存在を疑い得ない―“自分はなぜここにあるのか”と考える事自体が自分のレゾン・デートル（存在証明）である（我思う、ゆえに我あり）、とする命題である。'''コギト命題'''、「精神肉体二元論」といわれることもある。哲学史を教える場合の一般的な説明によれば、デカルトはこれを哲学の第一原理に据え、方法的懐疑に付していた諸々の事柄を解消していった、とされる。

また、これを意識の「内部」の発見と位置付けることもできる。中世までの哲学では、意識の内部と外部の問題系というものがなかった。いいかえれば、内部に現われている観念（表象）と外部の実在が一致すると思いなされてきた。ところが、デカルトの方法的懐疑はまずこの一致の妥当性を疑った。すなわち、表象と実在は一致するのではなく、むしろ表象から実在を判断することは間違いを伴う、というのである。「一度でも間違いが起こった事柄に関しては全幅の信頼を寄せない」とするデカルトは、それでもやはり、絶対確実なものを見付けようと試みた。ここで、絶対確実なものとは、表象で直観されたものから実在に関する判断が直接に導かれる事柄のことである。そして、このようなものとは、実は「絶対確実なものを見付ける」という試みそのものを可能にする、「私は考える」という事実であった。これによって、意識の「内部」としての「考えるところの私」が確立し、そこに現われている観念と外部の実在との関係が、様々な形で問題に上るようになった。例えば、「観念に対応する実在はいかに考えられるべきか」や「もっとも確実な観念はなにか」といった問いが挙げられよう。

== 後世への影響 ==
以後の哲学は現代に至るまでこの影響を色濃く残しており、同時に、それに対する批判もマルティン・ハイデッガーなどから生まれている。
現代ではしばしば、デカルトのコギトの存在確立が近代の幕開けとなったといわれ、ポストモダンなどの見地から様々な形で批判されることがある。しかし、一般に大陸合理論の立場からいえば、デカルトの命題は''自我の存在を証明する推論ではない''。例えば、哲学者論理の推論と考えるのには慎重を要する。これはむしろ「いかなる推理syllogismからも帰結concluditurされない或る根本的な観念prima quaedam notio<!-- Respons. ad II. Object-->(デカルト)」であり、デカルト自身も、「ゆえに」という接続を相応しいとは思っていなかったようである。

== 後世への影響 ==
* スピノザは「我は思惟しつつ存在する(Ego sum cogitans.)」と解釈している。
* アンブローズ・ビアスは『悪魔の辞典』の中で、デカルトの発言は不徹底である、厳密性を更に求めるなら''cogito cogito, ergo cogito sum.''(「我思うと我思う、故に我ありと我思う」)というべきであろうと書いている。確かに、cogitoを論ずるときには、それが単なる「私」ではなく「考えるところの私」もしくは「私は考える」の意味であることを忘れてはいけない。
* 木城ゆきと原作の漫画『銃夢』において、自分の思考さえも集積回路のチップによって統制されているためにこの命題すら気休めにしかならない、と木城が書いている。むろん、「自分の思考さえもそのようになっている」と疑うそのことが自明である以上、この命題そのものの妥当性が失われているわけでは全くない。数学の正当性（5-1=4は実在するか？）すらも悪霊の仕業かもしれないと疑うなど、デカルトの方法的懐疑は極めて徹底的であり、木城の指摘はあまり正確とはいえない。