{{noteTA
|1=zh:ZEON; zh-hans:吉恩; zh-hant:吉翁; zh-hk:自護;
}}
'''RGM-79 GM'''（吉姆）是机动战士GUNDAM系列中出现的一种虚构兵器。它是该动画片世界观中主力兵器机动战士的一种。

==发展历史==

RGM-79 GM是ZEON公國的MS部队相抗衡。

在原作本編中只有出現吉姆、吉姆Ⅱ、吉姆Ⅲ。外傳OVA(0080、0083、08小隊、MS IGLOO)後來追加的其他吉姆則顯得自相矛盾且畫蛇添足，例如MS IGLOO中吉姆的光束噴鎗被降級為步鎗。

吉姆因為低劣的性能和難看的臉部造型，被連邦軍駕駛厭惡，安彥良和「機動戰士GUNDAM THE ORIGIN」
中阿姆羅也對吉姆有些不滿。

和吉翁軍的量產機不同，吉姆完全沒有ACE專用機，幾使是優秀的駕駛也沒有。

以RX-78-2 GUNDAM的标准来看，GM的性能十分參差不齊。主要因為V作戰的主要工程人員失蹤(Side 7遇襲)，使得很多最新測試資料未能趕及到達聯邦手上。聯邦被逼先使用RX-78的不良品零件(因為RX-78生產時要求規格很高，因此不良品規格還是非常的高水平)先行生產RX-79 GUNDAM量產檢討機/原型GM，然後以簡化腳部零件生產宇宙用的少數量產型RGM-79[E]以及地面戰專用的RX-79[G]和後來的RGM-79[G]來進行測試和生產線的確立。因流用很多RX系列的不良品，因此性能參差不齊，算是一種臨時拼裝的機體。

GM装备了一把小型光束噴枪（GM噴槍），这种步枪是GUNDAM所装备的光束步枪縮短版本，主要是縮減了前端米加粒子集束段，減少生產時間和成本，雖然在短距的威力一樣，但是因為集束部份較短，所以光束的擴散較快，有效射程減短，而且就像是短倍徑的火炮一樣，散佈界較廣。不过对于吉翁早期的老式MS，GM噴枪仍可有效击穿其装甲。GM的其它武器包括100mm和90mm星一号作战和所罗门战役的时候，大部分GM已经装备GM噴枪，不過殖民星內使用的RGM-79G GM指揮型則為免破壞殖民星壁面而還是使用90mm機關槍。极少数GM拥有GUNDAM使用的那种高價的光束步枪，就算是RGM-79GS GM宇宙指揮型也只有噴槍和步槍之間的一種普通光束槍。另外亦有一些武器是供特殊任務如狙擊使用，這些武器並沒有大量生產，而只有在任務時特別配給。例外的有RGM-79SP GM狙擊手2的狙擊步槍(實彈)和長距離光束步槍。

This article is about a mobile suit, a fictional weapon of the ''Mobile Suit Gundam'' anime metaseries.

The '''RGM-79 GM''' (pronounced "''Jim''" in Japanese), supposedly an acronym of '''''G'''undam '''M'''ass-production type'', is the mass-produced version of the UC history.

== History ==
After suffering heavy losses in the early phase of the RX-78 prototype, although proven to be extremely powerful, would almost certainly bankrupt the Federation's wartime budget if it was to be manufactured in the quantity needed for the ongoing struggle.  To solve this problem, the RGM-79 series was born.

The RGM-79 design was based on the same basic tactical concept of the Gundam — a general-use all-rounder unit capable of utilizing beam weaponry.  The production model of the GM removed and simplified many of the RX-78's more expensive construction design and complicated electronic systems, such as the Core Block system and the learning computer.  The RX-78's lunar titanium armor was replaced with the cheaper standard titanium alloy, and the Minovsky fusion powerplant was down-rated.  As a consequence of the reduced power output, the GM was armed with a cheaper, effective but short-ranged beam spray gun instead of the Gundam's more accurate and powerful beam rifle.  Other standard armaments for the GM included a 100mm machinegun or a 380mm bazooka, a single beam saber and two head-mounted 60mm Vulcan machineguns.  To make up for the relative deficiency in long-range firepower in space combats, every GM squad (usually 3 or 4 units) was usually tactically teamed up with at least 2 RB-79 Ball mobile pods for complementary fire support.

Because the GM incorporated the design concepts from both Jaburo and Luna II, the resultant product achieved over 90% parts compatibility between its space and land variants, greatly improving the Federation's battlefield logistics.  

The GM is a very agile mobile suit, with a maximum thruster acceleration of 0.94 ''g'' (9.2 m/s²), 180-degree turn time of 1.6 seconds, and a maximum running ground speed of over 102 Zakus and even Rick Doms in some aspects.  The GM also has a better sensor system than most Zeon units that allows it much greater detection range.  While its titanium alloy construction provided slightly superior protection compared to the Zeon standard high tensile steel, it was not enough to provide substantial protection against the beam weaponry and heavy projectile rounds, which had become standard by the time of its introduction.  Because of this, the GM is equipped with a full-size multi-layered shield coated with Lunar titanium on top for extra protection.

The GM's introduction in November of U.C.0079 would turn the tide of war totally against Zeon (although strictly speaking, Zeon was already in retreat mode after their crushing defeat in Odessa).  While not as well-armored as Zeon's new standard final battle of A Baoa Qu laid bare Zeon's strategic error, as masses of well-trained EFSF pilots in GMs (most of them seasoned ex-pilots for starfighters, assisted by analyzed combat datas from the learning computer system) overwhelmed the dwindling supply of Zeon veterans flying untested, unfamiliar mobile suits.

During the conventional and mobile pods, conventional tanks and atmospheric/space fighters (with over 30000 left even after the war), which is another form of bluff that is definitely enough to fill up the numbers.

After the One Year War, the RGM-79 design became the backbone of the Earth Federation Forces.  Many variants were produced throughout the 0080s, and the basic frame was not replaced until the appearance of the RGM-89 Jegan in 0089.  After the Jegans, although not as fast and heavily armed as the contemporary RGM-86R GM III, were chosen as the new mainstay mobile suits of the Earth Federation for the next three decades, the subsequent members of the GM series were no longer named "GM".

== Real Life ==
In real life, the GM was designed by Kunio Okawara for the original ''Mobile Suit Gundam'' television series.  Of the concepts introduced into the series, the GM, as a grunt-level mecha used by the protagonists of the series, is one which has become a staple of the mecha anime genre, the logical next step from one super-powered machine against a vast evil force to a full-scale conflict between two armies with the robotic equivalent of foot soldiers.  The GM served as a direct inspiration for machines within other Gundam shows, most notably the GAT-01 Strike Dagger series from ''Gundam SEED'' and ''Gundam SEED DESTINY''.  In addition, the concept of mass-produced machines on the side of the series' protagonists is seen in other mecha anime, such as the MBD-1A Dragoon from ''Metal Armor Dragonar'', and all the machines (the VF-1 Valkyrie in particular) used by the U.N. Spacy in ''The Super Dimensional Fortress Macross''.

Retcon redesigns were featured in the OVAs ''Mobile Suit Gundam 0080: War in the Pocket'' and ''Mobile Suit Gundam 0083: Stardust Memory'', although these redesigns have since been designated as separate models.  The GM is also a popular subject for various ''Mobile Suit Variations''.

There are two accepted versions of the RGM-79: the original design by Kunio Okawara (which featured a single-piece waist armor, no neck, a smooth, rounded face and ill-defined elbow joints and legs), and a popular redesign by Hajime Katoki which brings the GM more in-line with its predecessor, the RX-78 Gundam.  These two designs are functionally the same machine.  Generally the Okawara design is used to represent a more "nostalgic" GM, while the Katoki design displays a more "realistic" approach.

The idea behind the GM is to compensate individual performance with versatility, quantity and team battle tactics.  As a good all-round, beginner-friendly mobile suit more suitable for mass production and maintenance, the GM managed to outperform superior units like the Gelgoog on a strategic level, and proved itself to be a way more effective weapon in determining the outcome of the war.

== Variants ==
===SM===
Pronounced as Sa-Mu(サム), it was a parody of original GM, it is a cheaper model, and thus is mass-produced in greater number than the original GM. These units were produced to defend against Saku to protect Jaburo.  This unit is no ordinary MS, but a small unit having a single box-shaped head and body with the GM features drawn on it and rope-like limps.  It had appeared in the Gundam Battle (series) games as a hidden unit.

(Source: ''Gundam Ace'')

=== RRF-06 Zanny ===
Although can be considered as the "earliest GM", the '''RRF-06 Zanny''' is actually the product of reconstructing captured Zeon Zaku II units at the Federation's Luna II space fortress.  Since the Federation Forces lacked the mobile suit warfare know-how at the beginning of One Year War (particularly after the defeat at Battle of Loum severed most of the communication between Luna II and Jaburo), this machine serves mainly as a means of collecting mobile suit-related data.  The Luna II forces deployed these units during their greatest period of resistance at the beginning of the war.  The collected battle data was later incorporated into the design of Type E GMs after acquisition of further combat data from the RX-78-2 Gundam's learning computer.

=== RGM-79[E] GM Type E ===
The '''GM Type E''' was one of the earliest models of GM, developed soon after the combat data from the V Project reached Luna II via White Base.  The Type E was designed for space combat in coordination with the '''RGM-79[G] Ground Type GM'''. Data from these two pre-production models would serve as the basis for the later mass-produced "General Type" model.  Very few of these units reached combat, and those that did were generally seen as a disappointment thanks to their weak armor and maneuverability.

(Source: ''Mobile Suit Gundam: The 08th MS Team'')

=== RGM-79[G] GM Ground Type ===
The '''RGM-79[G] GM Ground Type''' was the second pre-production GM model designed by the Earth Federation to test the eventual mass-production of the General Type GM.  A counterpart to the RGM-79[E], the Ground Type featured enhanced armor plating, a unique shield design and an enhanced weapon loadout.  While it lacked the traditional head-mounted Vulcan cannons of its predecessors, the Ground Type was capable of wielding a 6-tube missile launcher and even a E-cap-based beam rifle.  The Ground Type also shared about 80% of its parts with the RX-79[G] Ground Type Gundam, allowing easy repair between the two models.  Although usually RX-79[G] Ground Type Gundams were repaired using parts from Ground Type GMs, there were a few instances of Ground Type GMs using parts from the Ground Type Gundams, such as Matt Healy's Platoon, who at one point replaced the standard Ground GM backpack with the Ground Type Gundam's backpack in order to allow it to use the parachute pack in a drop operation.

Overall, 42 units were produced.  Twelve were used by Kojima Battalion stationed in Southeast Asia.  The other 30 were used in the Federation's first successful counteroffensive against the Zeon Forces in Operation Odessa.  The Ground Type was discontinued in November U.C.0079 when its cheaper mass-production successor, the RGM-79, was introduced.

(Source: ''Mobile Suit Gundam: The 08th MS Team'')

==== RGM-79[G] GM Sniper Ground Type ====
A variant of the RGM-79[G] GM Ground Type, designed for long-range precision firepower.  Painted a drab olive green for camouflage, its hand armament consisted of a single long-range beam rifle with a high-power scope.  However the rifle needed a large amount of power input, so it was connected to an external power generator and a cooling device.  At least four GM Snipers were used by the Kojima Battalion, and proven to be effective weapons against the fearsome Apsalus III.

(Source: ''Mobile Suit Gundam: The 08th MS Team'')

=== RGM-79C GM Kai ===

The '''RGM-79C GM "Kai"''' (改, "modified"), also known as the '''GM Late Type''', is an upgrade of the standard RGM-79 developed around the conclusion of the One Year War.  While similar in many respects to the wartime model, the GM Kai featured upgraded maneuvering thrusters that provided a modest upgrade in performance.  This refinement of the GM design would serve as the basis for numerous variants, and was the mainstay of the Federal forces until the rollout of the new GM II units in U.C.0085.
(Source: ''Mobile Suit Gundam 0083: Stardust Memory'')

==== RGM-79P Powered GM /RGM-79CR GM Kai High Mobility Type ====
RGM-79CR is a loose designation encompassing several prototype GM units during the mid-0080s.  These models were designed as testbeds for new technology and were generally not fit for field duty.  The RGM-79P '''Powered GM''' was used by the Gundam Project to test the new GP series of prototype Gundam units. Its was outfitted with heavy upgrades to its powerplant, thrusters and shock absorbers located on bulky external backpacks.  Only two Powered GMs were produced; both of which were assigned to the Torrington Base in Australia.

The RGM-79CR '''High Mobility Type''' was assigned to the Titans Test Team to test the viability of the new RGM-79R GM II.  Painted in Titans blue, it featured numerous functional adaptations that rendered it the equivalent of the GM II in performance.

(Source: ''Mobile Suit Gundam 0083: Stardust Memory'', ''Advance of Zeta'')

=== RGM-79D GM Cold District Type ===

A variant of the original RGM-79, built near the end of the One Year War.  Designed to counteract Zeon's Baikonur Spaceport.

(Source: ''Mobile Suit Gundam 0080: War in the Pocket'', ''Mobile Suit Gundam: Lost War Chronicles'')

=== RGM-79F Land Combat Type GM ===
A GM variant developed for ground combat during the One Year War.  The upper half of the GM's armor was strengthened to protect against Zaku machinegun fire.  The '''Land Combat GM''' also carried a railcannon in addition to standard GM's armaments.  The Land Combat Type GM was mainly deployed on the European battle lines.

(Source: ''Mobile Suit Variations'')

=== RGM-79G GM Command ===

With the One Year War drawing to a close, the Earth Federation built the '''RGM-79G GM Command''' as an improved version of the standard RGM-79 GM.  The GM Command featured a slightly modified body type that allowed for extra thrusters, improving maneuverability.  The GM Command was generally assigned to ace units, although its late introduction to the war prevented many of these units from seeing combat.  A notable exception was the conflict at the top-secret Federation research facility in Side 6's Libot colony, where GM Command units of the colonial defence forces sortied against Zeon skirmish units inside and outside the colony.

Two slight variants of the GM Command were produced, one suited for ground/intracolonial combats and another with extra maneuvering verniers designed for zero-G encounters.  This '''GM Command Space Type''' is sometimes distinguished by the designation RGM-79GS, although they are functionally similar units.

(Source: ''Mobile Suit Gundam 0080: War in the Pocket'')

=== RGM-79(GRS) Armored GM ===

Late in the One Year War, the Federation built the '''RGM-79(GRS) Armored GM'''. Considered a combination of the powerful RX-78-6 Gundam Mudrock and the GM Sniper II, the Armored GM was considered top of the line in terms of speed, even matching the Principality of Zeon's fearsome MS-09 Dom. However, it is unknown whether the suit was built from spare parts or a scaled down Mudrock. To keep the already high costs down, the Armored GM was usually equipped with either the RGM-79 GM's 90mm or 100mm machine gun or given a beam spray gun. The Armored GM saw limited producion and famously fought against the Midnight Fenrir corps who were defending a supply squadron in North Africa.

(Source: ''Mobile Suit Gundam: Zeonic Front'') 

=== RGM-79L GM Light Armor ===

A variation model of the RGM-79, the '''GM Light Armor''' was designed for fast hit-and-run strikes.  The Light Armor had just that: the barest minimum of armor.  The shoulder and ankle armors were removed completely, and the hip armor plating is noticeably smaller.  This decrease in mass allowed for better acceleration and maneuverability.  The GM Light Armor also used a beam gun that was more closely related to the RX-78-2 Gundam's beam rifle.  This beam gun packed a heavier punch and longer range but had limited ammunition.  The RGM-79L GM Light Armor was an overall success and was popular with many fighter-pilots-turned-MS-pilots.  The most famous was Captain Gary Rogers.

(Source: ''Mobile Suit Variations'')

=== RGM-79N GM Custom ===
The '''RGM-79N GM Custom''' was the limited production model of the RX-78NT1 Alex.  The Custom removed the Alex's panoramic cockpit and arm-mounted Zeta Gundam compilation movie, an RGM-79N unit is seen being in use (along with an RGC-83 GM Cannon II) by the AEUG, repainted similarly to the GM II. The RGM-79N GM Custom was also used as the mech of an alternate-dimension Kiva in the Cartoon Network series Megas XLR.

(Source: ''Mobile Suit Gundam 0083: Stardust Memory'', ''Mobile Suit Zeta Gundam'')

=== RGM-79Q GM Quel ===
Following the brutal fighting of the Delaz Incident of 0083, the Earth Federation decided to form a special task force to suppress possible rebellions in space colonies.  This new semi-autonomous force was known as the Titans.  The '''RGM-79Q GM Quel''', a refinement of the RGM-79N GM Custom, was chosen as their first mainstay mobile suit.  It featured improved performance over the GM Custom, and its recognizable blue color scheme served to intimidate enemies of the Titans.  However it was designed to fight inside colonies, not in the void of space.  It was only assigned to Titans, and became their main stay mobile suits until the release of Hi-Zack and Marasai.

==== RGM-79Q Hazel Reserve Unit ====
Utilized by the Titan Test Team, this RGM-79Q GM Quel is a reserve machine so that its parts could be exchanged with those of the RX-121 Gundam TR-1 [Hazel].  In essence, this is nothing more than a "Gundam Head", as its Gundam type-head is modified from standard GM-Quel heads; the rest of its body remains identical to that of the standard GM Quel.

==== RX-121 Gundam TR-1 Hazel ====
The RX-121 Gundam TR-1 [Hazel] is a functional test machine assigned to the Murphy team, based upon the GM Quel.  It was equipped with a Gundam head in order to test its psychological effectiveness against Zeon remnants, though it was actually modified from existing GM-Quel head instead of a true RX-type Gundam head.  As it is developed for use in real combat, as well as used as test machine, many of its parts have been replaced with enhancement parts like the new backpack, the movable booster pod attached to it, and the improved thrusters in its legs. As a result, its potential rivals that of an RX type.

Its beam rifle is a prototype version of the energy pack type which the next generation of machines are expected to carry, and this machine has also been used in the development and testing of other devices such as the shield booster.  Also, the support actuator units on the Hazel's shoulders can be fitted with either multipurpose launchers, or holding grips to help stabilize its arms while in High Mobility Form.  Its skirt armor is usually fitted with energy pack holders which store two energy packs apiece.

The Hazel's most distinctive equipment is the shield booster, which contains propellant tanks and a single thruster with an output of 22,000 kg.  This device is a further evolution of the sturm boosters used by earlier mobile suits, but unlike its ancestors the shield booster is retained as a shield after its propellant supply is exhausted, rather than being discarded when empty.  The Hazel's Assault Form is equipped with two shield boosters, one on each arm, and its High Mobility Form also carries one on its movable booster pod.

Although the original Hazel's specs are unknown, it spec is probably weaker than Hazel Custom, making its overall specs are probably very similar to those of the RX-78GP01 Gundam "Zephyranthes".