'''Sound Transmission Class''' (or '''STC''') is an  partition attenuates airborne Sound Reduction Index (SRI) ISO standard is used. 

The ASTM test methods have changed every few years and over many years have been changed significantly. Thus, STC results posted before 1999 may not produce the same results today, and this difference becomes wider as one goes back in time (that is the differences in test method from the 1970's to today are vast).

The STC number is derived from sound frequencies from 125 Hz to 4000&nbsp;Hz. These transmission-loss values are then plotted on a sound pressure level graph and the resulting curve is compared to a standard reference contour. Acoustical engineers fit these values to the appropriate ''TL'' Curve (or ''T''ransmission ''L''oss) to determine an STC rating. The measurement is accurate for speech sounds but less so for amplified music, mechanical equipment noise, transportation noise or any sound with substantial low-frequency energy below 125&nbsp;Hz. Sometimes, acoustical labs will measure TL at frequencies below the normal STC boundary of 125&nbsp;Hz, possibly down to 50&nbsp;Hz or lower, thus giving additional valuable data to evaluate transmission loss at very low frequencies, such as a subwoofer-rich home theater system would produce. Alternatively, Outdoor-Indoor Transmission Class (OITC) is a standard used for indicating the rate of transmission of sound between outdoor and indoor spaces in a structure that considers frequencies down to 80&nbsp;Hz (Aircraft/Rail/Truck traffic) and is weighted more to lower frequencies.

STC is roughly the logarithmic one and the human ear perceives a 10dB reduction in sound as roughly halving the volume - a 40 dB noise subjectively seems half as loud as a 50 dB one. (For more detail on equal-loudness curves see: Fletcher-Munson curves.) If an 80dB sound on one side of a wall/floor/ceiling is reduced to 50dB on the other side, that partition is said to have an STC of 30. This number does not apply across the range of frequencies, since the STC value is derived from a curve-fit of many datapoints. Any partition will have less TL at lower frequencies.  For example, a wall with an STC of 30 may provide over 40dB of attenuation at 3000&nbsp;Hz but only 10dB of attenuation at 125&nbsp;Hz.

Typical interior walls in homes (2 sheets of 1/2" drywall on a wood stud frame) have an STC of about 33. When asked to rate their acoustical performance, people often describe these walls as "paper thin". They offer little in the way of privacy.  Adding absorptive insulation (i.e. fiberglass batts) in the wall cavity increases the STC to 36-39, depending on stud and screw spacing.  Doubling up the drywall in addition to insulation can yield STC 41-45, provided the wall gaps and pentrations are sealed properly. 

Note that doubling the mass of a partition does not double the STC. Doubling the mass (going from two total sheets of drywall to four, for instance) typically adds 5-6 points to the STC. Breaking the vibration paths by decoupling the panels from each other will increase transmission loss much more effectively than simply adding more and more mass to a monolithic wall/floor/ceiling assembly. 

Structurally decoupling the drywall panels from each other (by using resilient channels, steel studs, a staggered-stud wall, or a double stud wall) can yield an STC as high as 63 or more for a double stud wall (see table below), with good low-frequency transmission loss as well. Compared to the baseline wall of STC 33, an STC 63 wall will transmit only 1/1000 as much sound energy, seem 88 percent quieter and will render most frequencies inaudible.

Due to their high density, concrete and concrete block walls have good TL values (STC's in the 40s and 50s for 4-8" thickness) but their weight, added complexity of construction and poor thermal insulation tend to limit them as viable materials in most residential wall construction, except in temperate climates and hurricane or tornado prone areas. Various Cellulose insulation installation options can result in an STC of 50 or greater. <ref>ICC Legacy Report ER-2833 - Cocoon Thermal and Sound Insulation Products, ICC Evaluation Services, Inc., http://www.icc-es.org</ref>

Materials which can improve STC's in walls include mass-loaded vinyl (MLV) and soundproof drywall, such as QuietRock. 

''It must be noted that acoustical performance values such as STC are measured in specially constructed acoustical chambers and field conditions such as lack of adequate sealing, outlet boxes, back-to-back electrical boxes, medicine cabinets, flanking paths and structure-borne sound can diminish acoustical performance. The as-built 'field-STC' (FSTC) is usually lower than the laboratory-measured STC.''

New multifamily dwellings(apartments, condominiums, duplexes, etc.) are required by building code to meet a minimum of STC 50 between units. This is sufficient to block normal speech, but may not adequate for a home theater or loud stereo which can reach 110 dB or more. 

STC ראשי התיבות של  Sound Transmission Class הוא דירוג על ידי מספר יחיד המתאר עד כמה מחיצה בבניין מבודדת מעבר של גלי קול.
מספר זה נגזר מבדיקה מיוחדת של מספר תדרים. נתון זה משמש עבור קירות פנימיים, תקרות ורצפות. היעילות של חומרים שונים ניתנת לדירוג על בסיס בדיקה זו, המנצלת את איבוד העוצמה של גל קול בטווח התדרים שבין 125 ל־4000 הרץ.
במקרים של שימוש במכשירים כגון Echo Sounder משוכללים ניתן לכוון ערך זה לצורך דיוק מדידת המכשיר
כתוצאה מכך, מדד זה אינו יעיל לתדרים נמוכים. ה־STC יועד בעיקר למדידת התדרים שבטווח התדרים של הקול האנושי. לכן ה־STC אינו מתאים למדידת יכולת בידוד של רעשים מכנים, מוזיקה או רעשים הנוצרים על ידי כלי תחבורה, אשר אינם נמצאים בטוח זה ובעיקר בתחום התדרים הנמוך. אבל בפועל ה־STC אקטואלי יותר בתדר נמוך מאשר נכון באופן תאורטי.

STC מודד בדציבלים את ההפחתה בעוצמת הקול בטווח התדרים הנדון. לדוגמה, אם קול בעל עוצמה של 80 דציבלים יופחת על ידי מחיצה ל־50 דציבלים, אז נאמר שמקדם ה־STC של המחיצה הוא 30 דציבלים.