thumb|Estelada Blava‎
thumb|Estelada Groga‎

Die '''Estelada''' (Region Valencia, die Balearen und Teile Aragoniens. Sie dient im Allgemeinen als ein Symbol der Unabhängigkeit für Katalonien, welche von einer Vielzahl von Katalanen gefordert wird.
So gibt es beispielsweise zahlreiche Demonstrationen, im speziellen in der Hauptstadt Barcelona, bei denen der Estalada eine schwerwiegende Bedeutung zukommt.
Die Flagge zieren vier rote Streifen auf goldenem beziehungsweise gelben Grund, sowie ein blaues Dreieck mit einem weißen Stern. Man unterscheidet zwischen der oben angeführten ''Estelada Blava'' und der ''Estelada Groga'', bei der das Dreieck gelb ist, mit einem roten Stern in der Mitte.

== Bedeutung ==
Wie bereits thematisiert kommt der Flagge eine maßgebliche Bedeutung im Kampf für die Unabhängigkeit Kataloniens zu. Für die Katalanen ist es mehr als nur eine Flagge, sondern vielmehr ein Symbol nationaler Verbundenheit und Stärke der Region Katalonien. Sie steht für die Eigenständigkeit der katalanischen Sprache Català, der katalanischen Kultur, sowie der Menschen allgemein. Die Estelada wurde im Jahre 1918 zum ersten Mal in Katalonien präsentiert. Als Vorlage diente hierzu die kubanische Nationalflagge, die ebenfalls ein Stern ziert.

Im allgemeinen gilt die Estelada Groga als Symbol für den Sozialismus und den Kommunismus in Katalonien, die Estelada Blava wird von katalonischen Nationalisten verwendet.

The '''estelada''' is a flag symbolizing the independence of Catalan countries (Catalonia, Valencian Country, Balears Islands and North Catalonia).
thumb|right|Blue estelada and Catalan Countries

== Design and meaning ==
The ''estelada'' (Catalan: starry) dates from the early 20th century. It was born from the fusion of the four traditional red stripes of the ''Senyera'' with a triangle containing a star from the flag of Cuba. 

== History ==
right|thumb|The blue estelada flag
The 3rd Article of the provisional Constitution of the Catalan Republic, written and approved in 1928 in Cuba by the “Assemblea Constituent” (Constituent Assembly) of Catalan separatism, specifically provides that the official flag of the Catalan Republic consists of four red bars on a yellow field, superimposed with a blue triangle and white five-pointed star.

The star in the fighting flag comes from the early days of nationalism. The lone star means national freedom and independence. Cuba's fight for its independence was followed with attention by the Catalanists of the nineteenth century. Once the Cuban War of Independence ended, in 1906, the Centre Catalanista de Santiago de Cuba (Catalanist Centre of Santiago de Cuba) was created, where one could already see the primitive Catalan “estelada” flag: in the middle of a “senyera” there was a white star with five points.

The first star with a clear nationalist intention known in Catalonia is of a date before 1904, and it has to do with the “Unió Catalanista” (Catalanist Union). It is a stamp commemorating the ownership process of “Pi de les Tres Branques” (The Three Branches Pine) by the Catalanist Union.

Later, in 1906, a star appears in the headers of the magazine ''Fora Grillons!'' (Breaking Chains!), made in Santiago de Cuba by Catalan exiles (a publication that already claimed clearly the independence of Catalonia).

During the twenties, once the First World War is over, Europe sees a wave of creation of nation-states, helped by the American president Woodrow Wilson.

The politics of the Georgia, were declared independent but occupied by the Soviets straight away.

In all these nations that have the hope of freedom, pressure groups start to mobilize in international spheres. In the Catalan case, the Comitè Pro-Catalunya (Pro-Catalonia Committee) was one of the most active. It was in these circumstances that a need was seen to have a symbol able to represent the Catalan aspirations and, of course, a star appeared on it.

It was since then that one started to hear about the “estelada” flag. Its design is, probably, of Vicenç Albert Ballester, where the blue triangle signifies the blue sky of humanity, and in its centre, the white star symbolizes freedom.

The first photograph where the flag appears is in a publication dated in 1918. It is the bulletin “L’intransigent” (The Intransigent), where a photo is reproduced of a group of young Americans and Catalan separatists holding both flags.

Also in 1918, there is in circulation a comic strip &ndash; a stamp without postal value &ndash; dedicated to the future Society of Nations, where there was also an “estelada”.

There are several kinds of “estelada”. One is in the last number of “La Tralla” (a radical separatist magazine from the 1920s), before the coup d'état by Miguel Primo de Rivera. The other is in a document published by the Comitè Pro-Catalunya written in Catalan and Arabic, to greet and encourage one of the Moroccan leaders who revolted against Spain.

In Cuba, appears for first time the headers of the magazine “La Nova Catalunya” (1920), (The New Catalonia).

The “estelada” flag goes on to appear in other Catalan separatist publications.

The “estelada” was in the possession of Francesc Macià during the failed invasion of Prats de Molló in 1926. It appears between the Catalan volunteers in prison and the time when they were taken to Paris to be put on trial. There are also photos of the volunteers with the “estelada” in many other different places.