:''This article is related to the study of self-replicating units of culture, not to be confused with mimetics.''
'''Memetics''' is a neo-Darwinian approach to evolutionary models of cultural information transfer based on the concept of the ''meme''.  Starting from a metaphor used in the writings of Richard Dawkins, it has since turned into a new area of study, one that looks at the self-replicating units of culture. It has been proposed that just as memes are analogous to genes, memetics is analogous to genetics.

==History of the term==
In his book ''ethologist Richard Dawkins used the term ''meme'' to describe a unit of human cultural transmission analogous to the gene, arguing that replication also happens in culture, albeit in a different sense. In his book, Dawkins contended that the meme is a unit of information residing in the brain and is the mutating replicator in human cultural evolution. It is a pattern that can influence its surroundings – that is, it has causal agency – and can propagate. This created great debate among sociologists, biologists, and scientists of other disciplines, because Dawkins himself did not provide a sufficient explanation of how the replication of units of information in the brain controls human behaviour and ultimately culture, since the principal topic of the book was genetics. Dawkins apparently did not intend to present a comprehensive theory of ''memetics'' in ''The Selfish Gene'', but rather coined the term ''meme'' in a speculative spirit. Accordingly, the term "unit of information" came to be defined in different ways by many scientists.

The modern memetics movement dates from the mid 1980s.  A January 1983 Metamagical Themas column [http://books.google.com/books?id=o8jzWF7rD6oC&pg=PA49&dq=On+viral+sentences+and+self-replicating+structures&sig=kF6BGlEe2DzjrQFDIKmH_Evip2A] by Douglas Hofstadter in ''Scientific American'' was influential as was his 1985 book of the same name. "Arel Lucas suggested that the discipline that studies memes and their connections to human and other carriers of them be known as memetics by analogy with 'genetics.'" [http://books.google.com/books?id=o8jzWF7rD6oC&pg=PA65&lpg=PA65&dq=%22arel+lucas%22+memetics+themas&source=web&ots=jOEa5sHlep&sig=I077Pw-CrIePgwp4L1dBNriys_E] (This might not be the earliest use of "memetics.")  Dawkins' ''The Selfish Gene'' has been a factor in drawing in people of disparate intellectual backgrounds. Another stimulus was the publication in 1992 of ''Consciousness Explained'' by Tufts University philosopher Daniel Dennett, which incorporated the meme concept into a theory of the mind. In his 1993 essay Viruses of the Mind, Richard Dawkins used memetics to explain the phenomenon of religious belief and the various characteristics of organised religions. By then, memetics were picked up by art as well and thus a popular concept (e.g. Neal Stephenson's Snow Crash).

However, the foundation of memetics in full modern incarnation originates in the publication in 1996, of two books by authors outside the academic mainstream: ''Virus of the Mind: The New Science of the Meme'' by former Microsoft executive turned motivational speaker and professional poker player, Richard Brodie, and ''Thought Contagion: How Belief Spreads Through Society'' by Aaron Lynch, a mathematician and philosopher who worked for many years as an engineer at Fermilab. Lynch claimed to have conceived his theory totally independently of any contact with academics in the cultural evolutionary sphere, and apparently was not even aware of Dawkins' ''The Selfish Gene'' until his book was very close to publication.

Around the same time as the publication of the books by Lynch and Brodie, a new e-journal appeared on the web, hosted by the Centre for Policy Modelling at Manchester Metropolitan University [http://www.jom-emit.org/ Journal of Memetics – ''Evolutionary Models of Information Transmission''.]  The journal has since then been taken over by Francis Heylighen of the CLEA research institute at the Vrije Universiteit Brussel. The e-journal soon became the central point for publication and debate within the nascent memetics community. (There had been a short-lived paper memetics publication starting in 1990, the ''Journal of Ideas'' edited by Elan Moritz. [http://www.dcs.gla.ac.uk/idom/irlist/new/1991/91-viii-43-86/Journal_of_Ideas;_Announcement_&_Call_for_Papers.html])[http://www.dcs.gla.ac.uk/idom/irlist/new/1991/91-viii-43-86/Journal_of_Ideas;_Announcement_&_Call_for_Papers.html])  In 1999, Susan Blackmore, a psychologist at the University of the West of England, published ''The Meme Machine'', which more fully worked out the ideas of Dennett, Lynch and Brodie and attempted to compare and contrast them with various approaches from the cultural evolutionary mainstream, as well as providing novel, and controversial, memetic-based theories for the evolution of language and the human sense of individual selfhood.

The term is a Ancient Greek  (''''), meaning "imitator, pretender", and was used in 1904 by the German evolutionary biologist engram theory of memory, in his work ''Die mnemischen Empfindungen in ihren Beziehungen zu den Originalempfindungen'', translated into English in 1921 as ''The Mneme''. Until Daniel Schacter published ''Forgotten Ideas, Neglected Pioneers: Richard Semon and the Story of Memory'' in 2000, Semon's work had little influence.

==Internalists and externalists==
The memetics movement split almost immediately into those who want to stick to Dawkins' definition of a meme as "a unit of cultural transmission."  Typical of this first group is Gibran Burchett, the founder of Aether Lumin Research firm, who has stated that a meme can be defined, more precisely, as a unit of cultural information that can be copied, located in the brain."  A second group wants to redefine memes as observable cultural artifacts and behaviours. 

These two schools became known as the "internalists" and the "externalists." Prominent internalists included both Lynch and Brodie; the most vocal externalists included Derek Gatherer, a geneticist from Liverpool John Moores University and William Benzon, a writer on cultural evolution and music. The main rationale for externalism was that internal brain entities are not observable, and memetics cannot advance as a science, especially a quantitative science, unless it moves its emphasis onto the directly quantifiable aspects of culture. Internalists countered with various arguments: that brain states will eventually be directly observable with advanced technology, that most cultural anthropologists agree that culture is about beliefs and not artefacts, or that artefacts cannot be replicators in the same sense as mental entities (or DNA) are replicators. The debate became so heated that a 1998 Symposium on Memetics, organised as part of the 15th International Conference on Cybernetics, passed a motion calling for an end to definitional debates.

The most advanced statement of the internalist school came in 2002 with the publication of ''The Electric Meme'', by Robert Aunger, an anthropologist from the University of Cambridge. Aunger also organised a conference in Cambridge in 1999, at which prominent sociologists and anthropologists were able to give their assessment of the progress made in memetics to that date. This resulted in the publication of ''Darwinizing Culture: The Status of Memetics as a Science'', edited by Aunger and with a foreword by Dennett, in 2000.

==Maturity==
In 2005, the ''Journal of Memetics – Evolutionary Models of Information Transmission'' ceased publication and published a set of "obituaries" for memetics. This was not intended to suggest that there can be no further work on memetics. A relaunch of this journal is in the works and the journal is again accepting new submissions <ref>[http://www.jom-emit.org/ Journal of Memetics - Aims and Scope<!-- Bot generated title -->]</ref>. Susan Blackmore has left the University of the West of England to become a freelance science writer and now concentrates more on the field of consciousness and cognitive science. Derek Gatherer moved to work as a computer programmer in the pharmaceutical industry, although he still occasionally publishes on memetics-related matters. Richard Brodie is now climbing the world professional poker rankings. Aaron Lynch disowned the memetics community and the words "meme" and "memetics" (without disowning the ideas in his book), adopting the self-description "thought contagionist".  Lynch lost his previous funding from a private sponsor and after his book royalties declined, he was unable to support himself as a private memetics/thought-contagion consultant. He died in 2005.

Susan Blackmore (2002) re-stated the meme definition as whatever is copied from one person to another person, whether habits, skills, songs, stories, or any other kind of information. Further she said that memes, like genes, are replicators. That is, they are information that is copied with variation and selection. Because only some of the variants survive, memes (and hence human cultures) evolve. Memes are copied by imitation, teaching and other methods, and they compete for space in our memories and for the chance to be copied again. Large groups of memes that are copied and passed on together are called co-adapted meme complexes, or ''memeplexes''. In her definition, thus, the way that a meme replicates is through imitation. This requires brain capacity to generally imitate a model or selectively imitate the model. Since the process of social learning varies from one person to another, the imitation process cannot be said to be completely imitated. The sameness of an idea may be expressed with different memes supporting it. This is to say that the mutation rate in memetic evolution is extremely high, and mutations are even possible within each and every interaction of the imitation process. It becomes very interesting when we see that a social system composed of a complex network of microinteractions exists, but at the macro level an order emerges to create culture.

==Critique==

Benitez-Bribiesca, a critic to memetics, calls it "a pseudoscientific conciousness and cultural evolution" among other things. As factual criticism, he refers to the lack of a ''code script'' for memes, as the DNA is for genes, and to the fact that the meme mutation mechanism (i.e., an idea going from one brain to another) is too unstable (low replication accuracy and high mutation rate), which would render the evolutionary process chaotic.<ref>Benitez-Bribiesca, Luis (2001): ''[http://redalyc.uaemex.mx/redalyc/pdf/339/33905206.pdf Memetics: A dangerous idea]''. Interciecia 26: 29–31, p.&nbsp;29.</ref>

Another scientific critique comes from semiotics, (e.g., Deacon<ref>Terrence Deacon, The trouble with memes (and what to do about it). ''The Semiotic Review of Books'' 10(3). </ref>, Kull<ref>Kalevi Kull (2000), Copy versus translate, meme versus sign: development of biological textuality. ''European Journal for Semiotic Studies'' 12(1), 101–120. </ref>) stating that the concept of meme is a primitivized concept of sign. Meme is thus described in memetics as a sign without its triadic nature. In other words, meme is a degenerate sign, which includes only its ability of being copied. Accordingly, the objects of copying are memes, whereas the objects of translation (''sensu lato'') and interpretation are signs.
<!-- This last paragraph could be better explained. I'm fimiliar with the subject but was confused. "Tdiadic nature" "degenerate sign" the article would benefit from clarification of these terms. This may not be the proper place to put this but I don't know if there is a discussion page for this article.-->

==New developments==
Dawkins responds in ''A Devil's Chaplain'' that there are actually two different types of memetic processes. The first is a type of cultural idea, action, or expression, which does have high variance; for instance, a student of his who had inherited some of the mannerisms of Wittgenstein. However, he also describes a self-correcting meme, highly resistant to mutation. As an example of this, he gives origami patterns in elementary schools – except in rare cases, the meme is either passed on in the exact sequence of instructions, or (in the case of a forgetful child) terminates. This type of meme tends not to evolve, and to experience profound mutations in the rare event that it does. Some memeticists, however, see this as more of a continuum of meme strength, rather than two types of memes.

Another definition, given by deme'', seeing the meme as a cultural unit in a cultural complex system. It is based on the Darwinian genetic algorithm with some modifications to account for the different patterns of evolution seen in genes and memes. In the method of memetics as the way to see [http://cogprints.ecs.soton.ac.uk/archive/00003471/ culture as a complex adaptive system], he describes a way to see memetics as an alternative methodology of cultural evolution. However, there are as many possible definitions that are credited to the word "meme". For example, in the sense of computer simulation the term ''memetic algorithm'' is used to define a particular computational viewpoint.

Memetics can be simply understood as a method for scientific analysis of cultural evolution. However, proponents of memetics as described in the Journal of Memetics – ''Evolutionary Models of Information Transmission'' believe that 'memetics' has the potential to be an important and promising analysis of culture using the framework of evolutionary concepts. Keith Henson who wrote ''Memetics and the Modular-Mind'' (Analog Aug. 1987) [http://groups.google.ca/group/alt.mindcontrol/msg/103e03bce6100cac?hl=en&] makes the case that memetics needs to incorporate Evolutionary psychology to understand the psychological traits of a meme's host.<ref>http://human-nature.com/nibbs/02/cults.html</ref> This is especially true of time-varying, meme-amplification host-traits, such as those leading to wars.<ref>[http://www.mankindquarterly.org/summer2006_henson.html Evolutionary Psychology, Memes and the Origin of War]</ref><ref>http://www.kuro5hin.org/story/2006/4/17/194059/296/</ref>

Recently, Christopher diCarlo has developed the idea of 'memetic equilibrium' to describe a cultural compatible state with biological equilibrium. In "Problem Solving and Neurotransmission in the Upper Paleolithic" (in press), diCarlo argues that as human consciousness evolved and developed, so too did our ancestors' capacity to consider and attempt to solve environmental problems in more conceptually sophisticated ways. Understood in this way, problem solving amongst a particular group, when considered satisfactory, often produces a feeling of environmental control, stability, in short--memetic equilibrium. But the pay-off is not merely practical, providing purely functional utility--it is biochemical and it comes in the form of neurotransmitters. The relationship between a gradually emerging conscious awareness and sophisticated languages in which to formulate representations combined with the desire to maintain biological equilibrium, generated the necessity for memetic equilibrium to fill in conceptual gaps in terms of understanding three very important aspects in the Upper Paleolithic: causality, morality, and mortality. The desire to explain phenomena in relation to maintaining survival and reproductive stasis, generated a normative stance in the minds of our ancestors—Survival/Reproductive Value (or S-R Value). 

La '''mémétique''' est l'étude des darwinien, des codes et schémas culturels réplicatifs, appelés mèmes, dans leur habitat, l'homme et tout support d'information.

Elle peut être vue comme une généralisation de la théorie de l'évolution, du biologique vers l'informationnel. Elle se positionne ainsi comme une approche pluridisciplinaire, qui tend à regrouper tout courant évolutionniste non-biologique. La tendance d'une généralisation de la théorie de l'évolution s'observe ainsi dans des domaines aussi variés que ceux de l'intelligence artificielle, les neurosciences, la systémique, la psychologie, ou la sociologie. Par exemple, les chercheurs en intelligence artificielle utilisent l'algorithme génétique, pour résoudre des problèmes non-biologiques, en modélisant des créatures virtuelles.

Les méméplexes sont des ensembles de mèmes qui, une fois associés, optimisent leurs chances de se répliquer (tout comme les gènes, lorsqu'ils sont associés dans un organisme, optimisent leurs chances d'être conservés par la sélection naturelle). Par exemple, les religions sont des méméplexes particulièrements adaptés à leur environnement.

==Origine==
Le terme de mémétique a été proposé pour la première fois par Le gène égoïste'' (1976), et provient d'une association entre gène et ''mimesis'' (du grec « imitation »).

La mémétique applique les concepts pris de la théorie de l'évolution (spécialement la génétique des populations) à la culture humaine. Elle essaye d'expliquer de nombreux sujets très controversés comme la religion et les systèmes politiques en utilisant des modèles mathématiques. L'approche d'Aaron Lynch est un exemple<ref>Aaron Lynch, 1996, Thought contagion. How Belief Spreads Through Society. The New Science of Memes. Basic Books</ref>. 

De nombreuses têtes pensantes se demandent si l'analogie entre patrimoine génétique et culturel peut soutenir un examen approfondi et comment cette similarité pourrait être vérifiée.

La mémétique doit être clairement distinguée de la sociobiologie. En sociobiologie, les entités en évolution considérées sont des gènes et des humains. En mémétique il s'agit de mèmes et de solutions culturelles. La sociobiologie s'intéresse aux origines biologiques des comportements humains. Alors que la mémétique considère l'Homme non seulement comme un produit de l'évolution biologique, mais aussi comme un environnement d'une évolution d'éléments culturels.

La dérive mémétique se définit comme le processus par lequel une idée ou légendes urbaines et les histoires drôles constituent des types de mème à forte inertie. Le marketing viral est une tentative d'exploitation de l'inertie mémétique à des fins de promotion commerciale. 

Une grande partie du vocabulaire de la mémétique est formé en ajoutant le préfixe 'mèm(e)-' à un terme existant, provenant en général de la biologie, ou en substituant 'mèm(e)' à 'gèn(e)'. Par exemple : pool mémétique, mémotype, ingénierie mémétique, complexe mémétique. En tant qu'adjectif, mémétique est parfois remplacé par mémique, avec la même relation qu'entre génétique et génique.

==Les cultures évoluent-elles ?==

Dawkins observa que les cultures peuvent suivre une évolution similaire à celle de populations d'organismes vivants. Différents concepts peuvent passer d'une génération de créatures culturelles à l'autre et influencer, en bien ou en mal, les chances de survie de ces créatures culturelles hébergées par les humains. La mort de l'humain porteur est la plus forte contrainte, pour une créature mémétique, mais pas la seule. Par exemple, différentes cultures peuvent concevoir indépendamment des outils uniques et spécifiques,  et leur efficacité peut influencer directement les chances de prospérité de leur concepteur, et procurer ainsi des avantages sur les cultures concurrentes. Les méthodes prouvées ainsi meilleures peuvent alors être adoptées par une plus grande proportion de la population. Chaque mème agit de façon similaire à un gène biologique qui peut être présent ou absent dans des populations de solutions culturelles données, la présence et la transmission génération après génération d'un mème sont directement liées à sa fonction.

Une caractéristique clé d'un mème vient de son mode de propagation par imitation, comme l'a montré le sociologue français Gabriel Tarde. Le phénomène d'imitation appliqué à l'homme peut être considéré comme un comportement augmentant la capacité d'un individu à se reproduire et propager son génome. Les imitateurs auraient ainsi réussi à génétiquement accroître la capacité du cerveau à bien imiter. Dans ce sens, imiter signifie la capacité d'absorber des informations en utilisant ses sens pour ensuite les réutiliser. Cette information peut être inanimée, comme un livre, ou plus typiquement animée comme un autre humain dont le comportement va fournir des informations qui pourront être réutilisées. Les sources inanimées d'information ont été appelées systèmes de rétention. Sans le support de cerveaux suffisamment évolués pour évaluer leurs points clés de comportement et l'intérêt de les copier, les mèmes ne pourraient pas se propager. Les mèmes (ou des comportements acquis et propagés par imitation) ont été observés chez d'autres espèces que l'homme telles que les dauphins, les primates ou certains oiseaux. D'autres exemples de transmission de mèmes simples ont été aussi mis en évidence artificiellement chez les céphalopodes ou les rats.