De '''Punjab''' is een gebied in het noorden van Indus, Jhelum, Beas, Chennab en Sutlej. Al deze rivieren brengen smeltwater uit de Himalaya mee waarmee het gebied geïrrigeerd kan worden. Punjab staat daarom bekend als de graanschuur van India. Zowel in India als in Pakistan vormt de Punjab een van de welvarendste delen van het land. Punjab is bekend als de geboorteplek van het Sikhisme.

==Geografie==
De Punjab wordt in het noorden begrensd door de Baluchistan, in het zuiden door Sindh (de vlakte van de Indus) en in het zuidoosten door de Cholistan/Tharwoestijn.

De belangrijkste steden in de Punjab zijn: Jhelum, Ludhiana in India.

Het gebied is verdeeld in de Indiase deelstaten Punjab en Punjab.

==Naamgeving==
Het woord Punjab bestaat uit de 2 proto-Indische wortels: pancha (betekent ''vijf'', verbasterd tot panj, en door de vroegere Britse naamconventies voor de korte Indische a met een u geschreven) en apa (betekent ''water'', verbasterd tot ap en ab). De naam betekent ''land van vijf rivieren''. Daarbij wordt de Indus niet meegeteld, het gaat hier om de vijf zijrivieren. Hoewel het klimaat vrij droog is, heeft het toch een rijke vegetatie, door de rivieren die door het gebied stromen.

thumb|350px|Punjab region, 1903
'''Punjab'''  (, , ), also '''Panjab''' (, meaning ''"Land of the Five Rivers"'') (c.f. ''ap-''), is a region straddling the border between Beas, Ravi, Jhelum; all these are tributaries of the Punjabis and speak a language named Punjabi. The main religions of the Punjab region are Islam, Sikhism, Hinduism and Christianity.

The area that is now known as the Greater Punjab was a location comprised of vast territories of eastern Swat/Kabul in the west to Delhi in the east i.e  the area including parts of Afghanistan and the plains up to the Ganges
<ref> Aryan and non-Aryan Names in Vedic India, Data for the linguistic situation, c. 1900-500 B.C., p 17; The Home of the Aryans, 2000, p 28, Dr Michael Witzel; Also see: Substrate Languages in Old Indo-Aryan, (Rgvedic, Middle and Late Vedic), p 6, Dr Michael Witzel, Harvard University.</ref>. It was a centre of the prehistoric Avestic "A-sara" -- also meaning'' without head/government''--thus the Vedic ''Aratta'' is said to allude to A-rashtra i.e. kingless, headless or in other words, a republican people/territory (''See refs: The Ancient Geography of India, 1871, p 215,  Alexander Cunningham ; Evolution of Heroic Tradition in ancient Panjab, 1971, p 53, Dr Buddha Parkash; The Age of Imperial Unity, History and Culture of Indian People, p 49, Ed Dr R. C. Majumdar, Dr A. D. Pusalkar; Hindu Civilization, 1923, p 289, Dr Radhakumud Mookerji; The Generalship of Alexander the Great, 2004, p 255, J. F. C. Fuller; The Cambridge Ancient History, 1923, p 406,  John Bagnell Bury, Stanley Arthur Cook, Frank Ezra Adcock, Martin Percival Charlesworth, Norman Hepburn Baynes, Charles Theodore Seltman''). Also, the term "Vahika" denoted "those falling outside the pale of Aryandom" or "those who are outside the pale of virtue, and live away from Himavat, Ganga and Sarsvati..." (''See: Ethnology of Ancient Bhārata, 1970, p 113, Ram Chandra Jain; A Grammatical Dictionary of Sanskrit (Vedic), 1953, p 52, Vasudeva Sharana Agrawala, Surya Kanta, Jacob Wackernagel, Arthur Anthony Macdonell, Peggy Melcher; Tribes in Ancient India, 1943, p 71,  Dr B. C. Law - Ethnology''). The tribes of the "Aratta" or "Vahika" territories were of wayward nature, committed highway robberies, and had followed autonomous or republic way of life. They were definitely outside the pale of Iranian and transfrontier peoples such as the Kambojas and Pahlavas, as well as Ionians (Yavanas) and nomadic Scythians (Shakas).<ref>Buddha Parkash, ''Evolution of Heroic Tradition in Ancient Panjab'', 1971, p 53; Cf also: The History of Indian Literature, 1878, p 178, Albrecht Weber - Sanskrit literature.</ref>

The region, populated by Indo-Aryan speaking peoples, has been ruled by many different empires and ethnic groups, including Persians, Turks, Afghans, British. In 1947, it was partitioned between British India's successor states with the bulk (4 out of the 5 rivers) going to Pakistan and the remaining river was alloted to India.

The Pakistani Punjab now comprises the majority of the region together with the Hazara region of the Punjab has been further sub-divided into the modern Indian states of Punjab, Punjabi is spoken by (approximately) 65% of population in Pakistani Punjab (another 25% speak Punjabi variants) and 92.2% in Indian Punjab.<ref>[http://www.censusindia.net/cendat/datatable26.html]</ref><!-- Maybe 65% referred to HP/Haryana too? --> The capital city of undivided Punjab was Lahore, which now sits close to the partition line as the capital of West Punjab. Indian Punjab has as its capital the city of Chandigarh. Indian Punjab uses the Gurmukhi script, while Pakistani Punjab uses the Shahmukhi script.

==Etymology==
The name Punjab means ''"the land of five rivers"'', and literally translates from Persian into the words ''Panj'' (پنج), meaning "five", and ''Āb'' (آب) meaning "water" respectively. The rivers, tributaries of the Jhelum, Chenab, Ravi, Sutlej and Beas. The five rivers, now divided unequally between Pakistan(4/5) and India(1/5), merge to form the Panjnad in south central Pakistan, which joins the Indus.

==The Punjabi Language==

The language of the region is Punjabi. The official written script of Punjabi in the state of Punjab in India is holy and called Gurmukhi ''"(from the Mouth of the Guru)"''. All holy sacred Sikh texts are written in the Punjabi Script.<ref> "Gurmukhi Lipi." Khoj Patrika. p.110, vol.36, Professor Pritam Singh, 1992. Patiala: Punjabi University.</ref> Due to this holy element, it is common for people to believe it is inauspicious for any piece of paper that has been written on in Punjabi to touch the ground.

==Geography==
Most of the Punjab is an alluvial plain, bounded by mountains to the North.  Despite its dry conditions, it is a rich agricultural area due to the extensive irrigation made possible by the great river system traversing it. 
Punjab region temperature range from -2° to 40°C (MIN/MAX), but can reach 47°C (117°F) in summer and can touch down to -5°C in winter. Punjab has five rivers flowing through it which leads to various land formations such as doabs etc. Doab is the land between two rivers. Ambala is a doab. Another example of a doab is Mesopotamia which is between the rivers Tigris and Ufiris.

== History ==
 
thumb|Taxila is a [[World Heritage Site]]
thumb|A section of the Lahore Fort built by the Mughal empror Akbar.
thumb|The Bardari of Ranjit Singh, built in the [[Hazuri Bagh.]]
150px|thumb|The 33rd Punjabi Army ''(A Picture of an Commander: A Punjabi Subadar).''

As a result of numerous invasions, many ethnic groups and religions make up the cultural heritage of the Punjab. 

In prehistoric times, one of the earliest known cultures of South Asia, the Harappa civilization, was located in the Punjab.

The Vedic and Epic period was socially and culturally prolific in the Punjab. During this period, the Hindu scriptures, the Rig Veda and the Upanishads, were composed in the Punjab. Tradition maintains that the sage Valmiki composed the Ramayana near the present location of Amritsar. In legend, Krishna delivered the divine message of the Bhagavad Gita at Kurukshetra. Eighteen principal Puranas were written in the region. The authors of Vishnu Purana and the Shiva Purana belonged to Central Punjab.

The epic battles described in the Mahabharata were fought in the Punjab. The Gandharas, Kambojas, Trigartas, Andhra, Pauravas, Bahlikas (Bactrian settlers of Punjab), Yaudheyas and others sided with the Kauravas in the great battle fought at Kurukshetra.<ref>Buddha Parkash, ''Evolution of Heroic Tradition in Ancient Panjab'', p 36.</ref> According to Dr Fauja Singh and Dr L. M. Joshi: "There is no doubt that the Kambojas, Daradas, Kaikayas, Andhra, Pauravas, Yaudheyas, Malavas, Saindhavas and Kurus had jointly contributed to the heroic tradition and composite culture of ancient Punjab" <ref>See: History of Panjab, Vol I, p 4, Dr L. M. Joshi, Dr Fauja Singh.</ref>. 

In 326 BCE, Alexander the Great invaded the Punjab from the north and incorporated it into his empire. His armies entered the region via the Hindu Kush in north west Pakistan and his rule extended up to the city of Sagala (modern day Sialkot) in north east Pakistan.

At all times during the establishment and consolidation of Mughal rule, there was conflict, chaos, and political upheaval in the Punjab. However, with the Mughals prosperity, growth and relative peace was established, particularly under the reign of Jahangir. The period was also notable for the emergence of Guru Nanak (1469-1538), the founder of a powerful popular movement which has left a lasting impression on the history and culture of Punjab. Born in the district of Sheikhupura, he rejected the division of mankind into rigid compartments of orthodox religions and castes and preached the oneness of humanity, and oneness of God, thus aiming at creating a new order which embraced the all pervasive spirit in man. This new philosophy would serve as the foundation for the Sikh faith.

In 1713, Banda Bahadur wanted to establish a Sikh state in the Punjab. For this he fought relentlessly with the Mughals. His state lasted just under a year before its collapse. A number of years afterwards, he was captured and executed.

In Afghan treaties of friendship. At the formation of the Dal Khalsa in 1748 at Amritsar, the Punjab was divided into 36 areas and 12 separate Sikh principalities. From this point onwards the beginnings of a Punjabi Sikh Empire emerged.

Out of the 36 areas, 22 were united by Maharaja Ranjit Singh. The other 14 accepted British sovereignty. Ten years after Maharaja Ranjit Singh's death, the empire broke up and the British seized the Punjab.

The British raj had political, cultural, philosophical and literary consequences in the Punjab, including the establishment of a new system of education. During the independence movement, many Punjabis played a significant role, including Ajit Singh Sindhu, Bhagat Singh, Udham Singh, Bhai Parmanand, Muhammad Iqbal, Chaudhary Rehmat Ali, and Ilam Din Shaheed.

The Punjabis also play a prominent role in the mutiny against the British of Jhelum and Ludhiana served as centre of rebellion against the British government. 