'''Ашот I Куропалат''' (груз. აშოტ I კურაპალატი, ''Ashot I Kurapalati'') ( – умер грузинский Афанасия Багратиона правителя Багратиони происходили из старинной грузинской провинции Спери (Испир в современной Турции). Сами они считали себя потомками царей Древнего Израиля – Давида и Соломона. По данным эриставом Картли. Другиеже источники считают, что первым Багратионом который стал во главе государства был потомок в прямом мужском колене Гуарама Ашот I. В грузинской историографии тоже нет единого мнения на этот счёт.

Ашот был эриставом Картли (Халифату и в эмир. Потерпев порожение в борьбе против арабов, Ашот покинул Картли и обосновался в юго-западной Грузии, в Вахтангом I Горгасалом город Византийский император титул курапалата, но надеятся на помощь Византии ему не приходилось. Ашот своими силами боролся против арабов. Постепенно Ашот распростронил свою власть над всей южной грузией а затем присоединил и Картли. В Баграта I, цари будущей единой Грузии). Преемники младшего сына Гуарама стали жертвой внутренних междоусобиц рода Багратиони. 

'''Ashot I Kuropalates''' (Georgian: აშოტ I კურაპალატი, ''Ashot I Kurapalati''), presiding prince of Iberia for the Byzantine Emperor(end of the 8th cent. - Georgian St Archil, the last member of the old royal house of the Iberian Chosroids. However, the real date of Ashot's accession must have been later, since the last acquisitions of lands by his father Adarnase which are mentioned in the sources could only have taken place after the death of Archil.  

The claim put forward in traditional Georgian genealogy, that Ashot I was a descendant of the 6th-century prince Guaram I (c.Bagratid ruler of Iberia, cannot be sustained since Ashot’s father Adarnase was the grandson of Ashot III Bagratuni (732-748), presiding prince of Armenia for the Caliph. 

Ashot I initially presided as an ''erismtavari'' in the area around Iberia and bestowed with the highest Byzantine court title of a ''kuropalates'', he established himself in the deserted province of Artanuji (now Iberian king Vakhtang I Gorgasal in the Iberia/Georgia were effectively transferred from central Kartli to the south-western provinces of Tao-Klarjeti. 

From his base in Klarjeti, Ashot fought hard to recover more Georgian lands from the Arab occupation and, though not always successful, succeeded in taking much of the adjoining lands from Tao in the southwest to Shida Kartli in the northeast. Towards the late 810s, he allied with Theodosius II of Abkhazia (810/811-836/837) in order to stop the advancing Kakhetian prince/''chorepiscopus'' Grigol who had occupied part of Ashot’s territories in Shida Kartli. Even though Grigol was aided by both the Arab emir of Tbilisi, and the Caucasian mountain tribes of the Mtiulians and the Tsanars, he was defeated by Ashot in the battle on the Ksani river, and the outcome of the battle was that Ashot could restore his authority in the region.