thumb|upright|''Die Bremer Stadtmusikanten'' von Gerhard Marcks (1953)
thumb|upright|''Der Rufer'' an der Bundesbankfiliale in Aachen
'''Gerhard Marcks''' (* Bildhauer.

== Leben ==

Ab 1908 arbeitete Marcks in einer Werkstattgemeinschaft zusammen mit dem Bildhauer Richard Scheibe, 1912 wurde er zum Militärdienst einberufen. Ab 1918 lehrte er an der Staatlichen Kunstgewerbeschule in Berlin, 1919 wurde er an das Bauhaus in Weimar berufen. Ab 1920 leitete er die Bauhaus-Töpferei in Dornburg/Saale, wo er sich angeregt durch Lyonel Feininger insbesondere auch mit Holzschnitt beschäftigte.

Am 15. September 1925 wurde er als Lehrer der Bildhauerklasse an die Kunstgewerbeschule Burg Giebichenstein bei Halle berufen. Er unternahm Studienreisen nach Villa Massimo) und Villa-Romana-Preis.

1933 wurde er an der Kunstgewerbeschule entlassen und zog nach Nationalsozialisten seine Arbeiten und er erhielt Ausstellungsverbot.

1945 wurde er an die Landeskunstschule in Akademie der Künste.

1914 war er an Ausstellungen der Deutschen Werkbundes beteiligt, nach dem Zweiten Weltkrieg an der documenta I (1955), der documenta II (1959) und der documenta III (1964) in Kassel.

1954 erhielt er den Großen Kunstpreis des Landes Nordrhein-Westfalen, 1955 den Kunstpreis der Stadt Berlin.

1976 Freundschaft mit Christian Höpfner.

'''Gerhard Marcks''' (German sculptor, who is also well-known for his drawings, woodcuts, lithographs and ceramics.

==Background==
Marcks was born in Berlin, where, at age 18, he worked as an apprentice to German sculptor Richard Scheibe. In 1914, he married Maria Schmidtlein, with whom he would raise six children. During World War I, he served in the German army, which resulted in long term health problems.

With architect Walter Gropius (who would later be the founder of the Bauhaus school in Weimar), Lyonel Feininger, Scheibe and others, Marcks was a member of two art-related political groups, the Novembergruppe (November Group) and the Arbeitsrat für Kunst (Workers Council for Art). He was also affiliated with the Deutscher Werkbund, of which Gropius was a founding member.

==Bauhaus master==
In 1919, when Gropius founded the Bauhaus, Marcks was one of the first three faculty members to be hired, along with Feininger and Johannes Itten. Specifically, Marcks was appointed the ''Formmeister'' (Form Master) of the school’s Pottery Workshop, which was located not in Weimar but in an annex to the school in nearby Dornburg. The other teacher in that workshop, its ''Lehrmeister'' (Crafts Master) was Master Potter Max Krehan, the last of a long line of potters, whose workshop was in Dornburg. Krehan taught the students to throw pots on the wheel, to trim and glaze them, and to fire the kiln. Marcks, in addition to duties in Weimar, taught the history of the practice, encouraged experimentation, and sometimes decorated pots.  

Earlier, Marcks had made the models for a series of animal sculptures, which were reproduced in china by a porcelain factory. His interest in animal forms is reflected in the work he made for his first Bauhaus portfolio (''Neue Europaeische Graphik I''), such as ''Die Katzen'' ("The Cats") and ''Die Eule'' ("The Owl"), both woodcuts. In time, his focus shifted to the human figure, and it was this subject that continued to hold his attention for the rest of his life.

==Degenerate art==
In September 1925, the Bauhaus was relocated to Halle. After the death of its director, Paul Thiersch, Marcks was named his replacement, a position he continued in until his dismissal in 1933. He was fired because his work was deemed unsuitable by the Nazis, with the result that several works were in the infamous exhibition of "degenerate art" in Munich in 1937, along with that of other Bauhaus artists, among them Herbert Bayer, Lyonel Feininger, Johannes Itten, Wassily Kandinsky, Paul Klee, Laszlo Moholy-Nagy, Oskar Schlemmer and Lothar Schreyer.

Despite such persecution, Marcks continued to live in Germany (in Mecklenburg) throughout World War II. In 1937, when twenty-four of his works were confiscated and destroyed by the Nazis, he was prohibited from exhibiting and threatened with being forbidden to work. During this period, he made several trips to Italy, where he worked in the Villa Romana in Forence and the Villa Massimo in Rome. In 1943, his studio in Berlin was bombed during an air raid, and many of his works destroyed.