{{Infobox animanga/Header
| name            = Puni Puni Poemy
| image           = 
| caption         = 
| ja_name         = ぷにぷに☆ぽえみぃ
| ja_name_trans   = Puni Puni ☆ Poemī
| genre           = Adventure, Comedy, Magical girl, Science fiction
}}
{{Infobox animanga/OVA
| title           = 
| director        = Shinichi Watanabe
| studio          = J.C.Staff
| licensor        =  ADV Films
| episodes        = 2
| released        = 7 March 2001
}}

The spin-off from the ''comic and TV animation. It features some that series' secondary characters and many of its staff, primarily director Shinichi Watanabe. Like ''Excel Saga'', it is a parody of other anime, manga and various aspects of popular culture, though in this case with the magical girl genre providing its primary focus and general structure.

''Puni'' was banned in New Zealand in December 2004, on the grounds that it "tends to promote and support the exploitation of children and young persons for sexual purposes, and to a lesser extent, the use of sexual coercion to compel persons to submit to sexual conduct." A New Zealand anime fan, Simon Brady, applied to have the decision reviewed, but in June 2005 the review authority reached a similar conclusion about the show's legal status.<ref></ref>

==Episodes==
''Puni Puni Poemy'' comprises two episodes, both around 26 minutes in length.
* '''Part 1 - Poemy is in a Bad Mood'''
:It's already the start of a new alien with peculiar fashion sense and even more peculiar genitalia has executed and magic, and attacks the mecha in melee combat.
* '''Part 2 - With a Dream Greater Than Earth'''
:Now embodying the will of Earth itself, the wastefully energetic Poemy uses her new powers to literally tear through the alien mecha (passing salarymen and one copulating couple within it along the way), pursue her career as a voice actress (loudly referred to ''nine'' or ''ten'' times), and right wrongs as she sees them throughout the planet. Being wastefully energetic, however, the cure is ''worse'' than the disease! Sending a nuclear missile off-course, completely destroying an entire country that speaks in vegetables, breaking the neck of an otaku playing an ecchi computer game (''"Playing pervy games starting in the afternoon is also evil! I mean, those are for nights!" – Poemy'') prompts less ''angst'' for Poemy than awaiting a pager message from K which never comes. For that matter, the Aasu sisters don't take too kindly to a new magical girl horning in on their family business, sinecure though it was! A brief confrontation between Poemy and the sisters leads to them discovering her identity (and another impressive group bath); this takes the strain off, but when the alien invasion's final phase – a giant Death Star en route to destroy the planet – suddenly begins the next morning and the sisters are captured and Poemy's first voice actress job is rudely interrupted, it is up to Poemy to rescue them from the clutches of the very boy she has a crush on.

:The second episode parodies numerous H-anime and H-manga (more commonly known as censored by replacement with innocuous images, she proclaims, "That footage was rather satisfying just by using your imagination!"

==Characters==
* 
:The star of the show, Poemy Watanabe is ten years old and hyperactive beyond comparison. Described as "wastefully energetic" by most, she's actually otherwise quite normal – she's an eager student, she's got a crush on the popular boy in her class, and she really, really wants to be a voice actress. Or rather, she ''would'' be quite normal, if she wasn't so unable to stay in character that she shatters the fourth wall by constantly referring to herself by the name of her own voice actress, Yumiko Kobayashi. She's the adopted daughter of Nabeshin (who she refers to as "The Director," since that is in fact who plays him), and his wife, Kumi-Kumi, but when they perish in an alien attack along with their robot dog, she moves in with her best friend, Futaba Aasu.

:When an alien mecha attacks the city, Poemy is following Futaba into action when she abruptly encounters a mysterious and silent shamisen-strumming man whom the script apparently refer to as her father; he gives her a fish which stinks. By gutting the fish, however, it turns into a wand which transforms Poemy into Puni Puni Poemy, a magical girl embodying the will of Earth itself, with lots of traditional superpowers that prove sufficient to blow the mech up and right wrongs across the Earth.

:
* '''Shinichi "Nabeshin" Watanabe''' (ワタナベシンイチ ''Watanabe Shin'ichi'', ナベシン ''Nabeshin'')
:Nabeshin is the animated ''alter-ego'' of director Shinichi Watanabe, who previously appeared in ''Puni Puni Poemy'''s forerunner, ''Excel Saga.'' At the conclusion of that series, he married Kumi-Kumi, and at the beginning of this show, they have an adopted ten-year-old daughter, Poemy (who, in her consistent inability to properly recognize the fiction of the show, keeps referring to her father as "The Director"). But it's still business as usual for Nabeshin, as he finds himself hunted down by an alien assassin with peculiar genitalia. He has the power to generate lots of super deformed versions of himself from his afro.

:
* '''Kumi-Kumi'''
:Introduced in ''Excel Saga'', Kumi-Kumi was a simple mountain girl who rescued Nabeshin from an avalanche and attempted to feed him soup. But Nabeshin isn't too good with hot foods, so he refused, only to have her pursue him across the rest of the series. He finally relented, marrying her at the end of the final episode. At the start of ''Puni Puni Poemy,'' she and Nabeshin now have Poemy as their adopted daughter. Despite being killed by the alien along with Nabeshin, Kumi-Kumi is able to save her husband using acupuncture, because he is after all the Great Director Watanabe ''a la'' Great Teacher Onizuka.

:
* '''K'''
:K is one of Poemy's classmates, but unfortunately for Poemy, her wild crush on him isn't reciprocated. In the second episode, K discovers that he is an alien who had been raised as a human, and he takes charge of the invasion of the planet, which is generally focused around ravishing Japanese women since hentai transmissions have given the aliens the idea that that's what Japanese women are really like. Unfortunately for the aliens, Prince K's body is composed entirely of tentacles. Fortunately for them (and perhaps the Aasu Sisters), he's more talk than action.

:
* '''Mage Queen'''
:A mystical and mysterious figure, the precise nature of the Mage Queen is ambivalent. Initially her somewhat threatening monologue seems to count her an enemy of Earth, but she greets the eventual arrival of Puni Puni Poemy with joy and considers the invading aliens a threat. Her reign as Queen was quickly and tragically cut short when she was assassinated by one of the two alien henchmen.

:
* '''Alien Henchmen'''
:These extraterrestrial assassins dress like colorblind pimps from the waist up, speak in an undeciperable hipster jargon, and masturbate freely. Their genitalia, which look like Bungee Balls that hang down to their knees, can be used as defensive shields in a manner not unlike Itsue's whip. Alien #1 has one testicle; Alien #2, logically enough, sports two. No reason for this anatomical difference, which is the cause of some amusement, is ever given. Neither of them, ultimately, are whom they appear to be. Alien #1 does spend a majority of his time hanging out at the Aasu household completely unnoticed--apparently the food is quite good!

: - Alien 1
: - Alien 2

===The Aasu Sisters===
Futaba is but one of the seven Aasu sisters, the protectors of Earth itself. ''Aasu'' is the Japanese pronunciation of ''Earth'', and each of the girl's names is derived from a number, in reverse order, with the youngest being 1, and so on. All of the girls have impressive magical powers, but given that these powers are purely defensive in nature, the family is useless as an offensive unit. It is worth noting that ''aasu'' is also the Japanese equivalent of the English word, ''arse'', which is comically exploited in the English dub, such as the narrator's description of "The Peace of Aasu."
* '''Nanase'''
:At 28 years old, Nanase is the eldest sister, who works as a data processor in an office. Her power is the Earth Dance of Flowers, the ability to summon a whirlwind of flowers, to absolutely no effect. There are many hints that she would like to be a transsexual. Her name is derived from ''nana'', the Japanese word for "seven" (for which another word is "shichi"), thus she is the 7th of the Sisters.

:
* '''Mutsumi'''
:Mutsumi is 22 years old, and much to her own surprise speaks with a Kansai accent for no apparent reason ''(translated in the English dub as a Brooklyn dialect)''. She has something of a complex about the small size of her breasts, and possesses probably the most useless power of all the seven sisters - the Earth Breakfall, which means she can fall over safely. Her name is derived from ''mutsu'', the Japanese word for "six" (for which another word is "roku"), being the 6th of the Sisters.

'''Puni Puni Poemi''' (jap. Titel ぷにぷに☆ぽえみぃ) ist ein OVA und Spin-Off der Anime-Serie Excel Saga.

== Daten ==
* Produktionsland: Japan
* Originaltitel: ぷにぷに☆ぽえみぃ
* Erste Ausstrahlung: 2001
* Episoden: 2
* Regie: Shinichi Watanabe
* Musik: Toshiro Soda

== Handlung ==
Dieser Spin-Off der erfolgreichsten Serie von Anime-Persiflagen hat sich ein besonderes Anime Genre vorgenommen: Die Magical Girl Serien.

Die junge Poemi Watanabe, ihres Zeichens Tochter von Shinichi Watanabe oder auch Nabeshin, hat zwei Träume: Synchronsprecherin (Pager schickt. Allerdings könnte ihre Begabung im Traumberuf nicht schlechter sein und auch K könnte sich gar nicht weniger für sie interessieren. Dann geschieht das Unfassbare: ein Alien tötet Poemis Eltern und ihr Zuhause wird (dramatisch in Szene gesetzt) Opfer der Flammen. So ist sie gezwungen, dem Angebot ihrer in sie auch körperlich vernarrten Freundin Futaba nachzukommen und in das Haus der Aasu-Schwestern einzuziehen.

Als die Außerirdischen die Stadt angreifen und sich die (allesamt passiven) übernatürlichen Kräfte der Aasu-Schwestern als nutzlos herausstellen, gerät Poemi an einen sprechenden Fisch, der sie in Puni Puni Poemi verwandelt.

== Hintergrund ==
Kobayashi, wie sich Poemi selbst nennt, ist Yumiko Kobayashi, die Seiyuu von Poemi und zugleich Sängerin des Intros und Sprecherin von Excel Kobayashi, eines der Excel Girls aus Excel Saga.

Nabeshin ist die Cameo-Rolle von Regisseur Wata'''nabe''' '''Shin'''ichi, welche bereits in Excel Saga Kultfaktor erreichte.