{{Infobox animanga character
| name         = Yusuke Urameshi
| series       = YuYu Hakusho
| image        = 200px
| caption      = 
| first        = Chapter 1<br/>Episode 1
| last         = 
| creator      = Yoshihiro Togashi
| voiced by    = second movie)
| nickname     = 
| alias        = '''Eugene''' (Filipino dub)<ref name="Philippine">http://www.geocities.com/prisea.geo/sounds.html</ref>
| age          = 14 at the beginning of the manga, 18 when he returns from Demon World
| gender       = Male
| species      = Human, partly yōkai (Mazoku)
| born         = 
| death        = 
| nationality  = Japanese
| class        = 
| occupation   = Student<br/>Spirit Detective
| title        = Heir to one of the seats of the Three Kings
| relatives    = Atsuko Urameshi (mother)<br/>Raizen (ancestor)
}}
 is a fictional character and the main  protagonist in the anime and manga series ''YuYu Hakusho'' created by Yoshihiro Togashi. He is called '''Eugene''' in the Philippine version of the anime.<ref name="Philippine"/>

==Story==
=== Spirit Detective Saga ===

Yusuke, who is 14 at the start of the manga, is the toughest pupil in his school, Sarayashiki Junior High School, and is the rival of spotty attendance record, doing poorly in class, and picking fights with many other students. Additionally, in the manga, he smokes, drinks, and gambles. His rebellious nature is reflected in his wearing of a green uniform in the midst of blue ones.

While skipping school and being berated by his mother, Yusuke loafs around the town. Yusuke entertains a child by making silly faces, but when the kid wanders into the street in front of an oncoming car, Yusuke shoves him out of the way. He is struck by the car, and killed. As a ghost, Yusuke is greeted by an atypical version of the Botan. She remarks that the members of the Buddha, did not expect Yusuke to selflessly save the child's life. Thus, they have no place for him in the afterlife. She remarks that Yusuke can return to life, but he initially declines.

Yusuke's mind changes after he attends his wake, where people he knows pay their condolences to his mother. Atsuko, his mother, is extremely distraught, borderline catatonic, about losing her son. Keiko Yukimura (his classmate and girl friend) sobs uncontrollably, yelling Yusuke's name. Kuwabara appears, angry and upset that Yusuke died before they could finish their battles. When two of Yusuke's teachers belittle him at the wake, Mr. Takenaka, another teacher, berates them for insulting him. He pays his respects to Atsuko and sobs at Yusuke's passing; only then, Atsuko reacts, collapsing in tears at the mention of Yusuke. Lastly, the child whom Yusuke saved and his mother show up, and when the child asks if he can play again with Yusuke, his mother cries and hugs him. Understanding that he meant more to others than he let on, he decides to come back.

Yusuke is given an egg by Koenma, acting lord of Spirit World (in place of his father who often left to work in other places), and is told that it will hatch a Spirit Beast, which will help him get back to life. However, he must be a genuinely good person. If he is evil, the beast will devour him. Yusuke sacrifices the beast to save Keiko, who had received dreams and messages from Yusuke's ghost that he would be returning to life, and she needed to take care of his body so that he would be able to return to it. However, a fire starts in Yusuke's home and his body runs the risk of being incinerated. Keiko runs into the fire to protect it, and is trapped in the fire.  Yusuke gave up all the power gained from his good deeds after his death to have Koenma save her.  Koenma used this to put out some of the flames and opened up a path for her to escape from the fire.  Due to this incident, with Koenma directly in contact with Yusuke's soul, he figured that the wave cycle of Yusuke's power is extremely long(52 years) and has to meet the right time to be resurrected or he would have to wait for another 52 years before the next chance and decided to let Yusuke return to life earlier even though the fire incident should have delayed the process since his power gained from good deeds were used up.  The only way for Yusuke to be resurrected is by a kiss from someone who is very close to him until midnight.  Yusuke could tell by dream to 3 people he know to do this, he only told Keiko and Kuwabara since his mother started drinking and would not go to bed.  Kuwabara did not believe the dream due to its awkwardness and Keiko got delayed by her mother's illness.  Botan possessed Keiko's mother to leave a message saying Yusuke was in a more dire state than she does.  Keiko manages to kiss Yusuke in time, and Yusuke is returned.

After returning, Yusuke is surprised to notice a demon inhabiting the body of a street punk. Botan shows up and tells Yusuke that his experience with death allowed him to do these things. He is to become Earth's Spirit Detective, and protect the human race from demons.

Yusuke engages in many difficult trials in his first assignments as Detective. The first is to recover three stolen artifacts from Spirit World. Koenma trains him by teaching him how to fire his spirit energy, energy possessed by humans and spirits, as a weapon. This is Yusuke's signature attack, the Spirit Gun. Yusuke attempts to combat these three thieves: Kurama, who stole a mirror called the Forlorn Hope; and Goki, who stole a soul-stealing article called the Orb of Baast. Yusuke was able to defeat Gouki with the aid of Botan and his Spirit Gun. Kurama willingly turns over the Forlorn Hope, as he only wanted to use its power to save his mother's life. Kurama intended to sacrifice his life for the mirror to save hers, but Yusuke selflessly asked the mirror to take his so Kurama can enjoy his mother's life. The mirror granted Kurama's wish, taking half of each of their lives, but killing neither, and Yusuke took the mirror. Yusuke and Botan then went to fight Hiei, who kidnapped Keiko and tried to turn her into a demon. While Botan staved off the transformation, Yusuke fought the extremely fast demon, and managed to defeat him by reflecting his Spirit Gun off of the Forlorn Hope, intentionally missing Hiei to strike it and causing the arrogant demon to believe Yusuke missed. 

Yusuke then was sent to the compound of Master Genkai, an aged fighter who was looking for a successor to her powerful Spirit Wave technique (Reikō Hadō Ken or Spirit Light Wave Fist in the original Japanese version). Botan warned that a demon, Rando, would probably try to inherit her technique. Yusuke fought through her tournament and defeated Rando in the end(out of luck), becoming her successor. For the next two weeks (in the Japanese anime, it is a month and in the English anime, it is six months), Yusuke undergoes tough training with Genkai. As a result, his strength radically heightens, push him from a D class to a C class.

Yusuke was then sent to Maze Castle to defeat the four Saint Beasts and stop them from taking over the human race with demon parasites. Kuwabara decided to go with Yusuke, and Koenma sent Kurama and Hiei, who were on probation in the human world, to assist.  Yusuke fought his way to Suzaku, the leader of the group, and managed to defeat him, but at the cost of his own life energy. Kuwabara, the only human of the group, saved him by transferring part of his own life energy. 

Yusuke then goes with Kuwabara and Botan to rescue a beautiful ice apparition named Yukina, of whom Kuwabara becomes smitten. However, Yukina is actually Hiei's twin sister, a fact that Kuwabara and even Yukina herself is unaware of. Yusuke fights all the way to the Toguro brothers. Yusuke and Kuwabara defeat them with teamwork and rescue the maiden, but it turns out that the Toguros threw the fight on purpose. The younger Toguro brother coerces Yusuke to join the Dark Tournament (Ankoku Būtsukai or Black Martial Arts Tournament in the original Japanese) and defeat him in a real fight.

=== Dark Tournament Saga ===

To prepare for the Dark Tournament, Yusuke trains with Genkai for two months, pushing him from a middle C class to an upper C class. Afterwards, Yusuke, Kuwabara, Kurama, and Hiei, along with Genkai as 'The Masked Fighter', enter the Dark Tournament as the guest team, Team Urameshi. Often at times barely escaping out of the fights alive, and despite heavy bias against them by the tournament committee, they fight their way to the final of the tournament to face Team Toguro.

During the semis, Genkai gives him most of her Reiki so Yusuke can stand a chance against Younger Toguro, pushing him from a lower B class to a middle B class. Before the finals begin, Genkai and Toguro face off in an attempt to kill one another. It is revealed that Toguro was Genkai's partner from a previous tournament. After suffering a mortal wound, Genkai, with the last of her strength, explains that when they won the tournament fifty years ago, Toguro, who was once human, had his body become a yōkai's in order to preserve his strength and youth. Before dying, Genkai warns Yusuke not to become like Toguro. Yusuke becomes furious with Toguro over his master's death and vows to defeat him. 

In the finals, Yusuke now faces Toguro. However after Toguro reveals his full power, Yusuke cannot face him and, in order to bring out Yusuke's hidden power, Toguro kills Kuwabara. This brings Yusuke from a middle B to an upper B. Yusuke prepares his final spirit gun while Toguro undergoes another power up, bringing him from 100% of his strength to 120% of his strength. After unleashing their attacks, Yusuke comes out on top. It is revealed that Kuwabara faked his death to bring out Yusuke's power. Before they leave the island, Koenma revives Genkai.

The others he fought in previous rounds were:
Round 1 - Chu.
Round 2 - Assisted fighting M1, M2, and M3.
Round 3 - Bakken/Bakuken and Jin.
Round 4 - Absent(was receiving Spirit Orb from Genkai).
Finals - Younger Toguro.

=== Chapter Black Saga ===

'''浦飯幽助'''（うらめしゆうすけ）は、漫画及びそれを原作としたアニメと映画『幽☆遊☆白書』に登場する架空の人物。本作の主人公。

声：佐々木望

ゲーム『幽☆遊☆白書FOREVER』では声優である佐々木望の声質が変わった為、92年からやっていたアニメとは声が多少変わっているが同一人物である。

名前の由来は「うらめしや～」のシャレ＋「オカルト探偵団」の幽子から。
==人物==
初登場時14歳。皿屋敷中学2年生。身長・体重・血液型の設定は無い。
===来歴===
根はいいやつだが、喧嘩っ早く、中学生で、「喫煙」・「飲酒」・「ギャンブル」（特にパチンコ）・「万引き」・「かつあげ」等をする問題児。

一度死んで生き返ってからは、「喫煙」・「飲酒」・「ギャンブル」はやっているものの死ぬ前に比べると大分更生していた。

家族構成：母の温子との母子家庭で、父親とはかなり前に離婚しているため疎遠となっている。

第1話で蛍子のスカートをめくったり、第2話で、背後から蛍子の胸をわしづかみにした。アニメでは語られていないが、漫画によると以前にも1度やっているという。

アニメでは原作での喫煙場面が視聴者層（子供）への配慮からかアメに変更されていたりと大幅に削除されている。

漫画では魔界統一トーナメント時の妖力は修羅と同程度であり、黄泉とは60時間にも及ぶ死闘の末に降参している。
テレビアニメによれば黄泉との死闘で覚醒し黄泉並みの力を発揮し、
最終的にはあわや相打ちという場面もあった。
よって、魔界トーナメント終了時の彼は黄泉とほぼ互角の力に達していたと思われる。

後に、ラーメン屋になり裏稼業として人間と妖怪とのトラブル解決を手がける何でも屋をしているが、仕事内容はアイドルグループ「カルト」の3人のサインや所持品入手の依頼が多い。