'''ウィットビー教会会議'''（Synod of Whitby）は、664年にイングランドで開かれたキリスト教の教会会議。

イングランドのキリスト教は、当初アイルランドから伝わったケルト的キリスト教の影響が大きかった。アイルランドのキリスト教は、ローマのベネディクトゥス会則とは大きく離れていたほか、修道制を基礎としておりカトリックのような司教の管轄下におかれる教区が設けられていなかった。こうした様々な差異が、キリスト教の浸透とともに顕在化していき、両勢力の対立が強まっていた。こうした状況を収拾するため、664年、ノーサンブリア王のオズウィによってウィットビー教会会議が召集された。

イースト・サクソン司教チャドやリンディスファーン司教コルマンはケルト側で、ドーチェスター司教アギルベルフトやリポン司教ウィルフリッドはローマ側で論陣を張った。直接のテーマはイースターの期日算定をめぐるものであったが、両勢力のどちらが主導権を握るかという点で重要な意味をもった。結局、ローマ側の主張が通ったことで、ノーサンブリアにおいてローマ・カトリックが優位にたった。この後、徐々にローマ・カトリックがイングランド各地に影響力を拡大していった。

The '''Synod of Whitby''' was a seventh century Northumbrian
Saint Hilda's double monastery of Streonshalh (Streanoeshalch), later called Whitby Abbey.  

== Sources ==
thumb|190px|A manuscript of Bede's, ''[[Historia Ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum''.]]
There are two principal sources for the synod.  The first source, the ''Life of Wilfrid'', is a hagiographic work written by Stephen of Ripon, often identified as Eddius Stephanus, probably soon after 710.<ref>Colgrave, ''The Life of Bishop Wilfrid by Eddius Stephanus'', pp i-ix.</ref>  The second source is the ''Venerable Bede, written in 731.  One of Bede’s sources was the ''Life of Wilfrid'' itself, but he also had access to people who knew participants in the synod.  For example, Bede knew Acca of Hexham, and dedicated many of his theological works to him.  Acca was a companion of Wilfrid’s on some of his journeys to Rome.

Both accounts basically agree, though Bede gives a much lengthier discourse on the debate.  The description of the proceedings, where King Oswiu presides and rules but does not engage in the debate itself, which instead is conducted by ecclesiastics, parallels examples of other synods in other sources, such as one in the ''Vita Sancti Bonifati'' by Willibald (where King Ine of Wessex performed the same function as Oswiu).<ref>Catherine Cubitt, ''Anglo-Saxon Church Councils'' p. 6-7.</ref>  Nonetheless, it is important to observe that the authors, despite their relatively good access to sources concerning the synod, still wrote at a considerable distance, and the accounts, especially the quotations attributed to the participants, are more likely to be summaries of how Bede and Stephen understood the issue, rather than something like true quotations.  Further, the motivations of the authors influenced how they presented the material.  Bede placed his description of the event centrally in his narrative, and he has been recognised as overemphasizing the historical significance of the synod because Easter calculation was of special interest to him, and also because he wished to stress the unity of the English Church.<ref>Patrick Wormald, ‘Bede and the ‘Church of the English’, in ''The Times of Bede'', p. 211.</ref>  However, Bede’s accuracy as a historian has been well regarded by Anglo-Saxon scholars, and historians have generally been comfortable following Bede's basic presentation of the synod.  Stephen’s text has found more criticism, and Reginald Poole identified many of his inaccuracies, but Stephen's account of the synod did not suffer the same criticism as other passages in his work.<ref>see Poole, Reginald L. ‘St. Wilfrid and the See of Ripon’, in English Historical Review 34 (1919).</ref>

== Background ==

liturgical traditions, labeled the “Ionan” and “Roman” traditions.  The “Ionan” practice was that of the Irish monks who resided in a monastery on the isle of Pope Gregory the Great and thus had established Roman practice in his realm.  However, following his death and a year of political instability, Aidan. 

One of the main differences between the two traditions, and hence a source of controversy, was the proper calculation of Easter.  Passover, Christian holiday), which was held on the fourteenth day of the first lunar month of the Jewish year, called ''crucifixion according to .  However, it came to be considered that Easter should be held on a Sunday, the day of the resurrection, and the Frankish monasteries and Ionan monasteries (the latter had been founded there by the Ionan St. Columbanus), and the Ionan tables had been rejected.  Likewise, synods in southern Ireland, in the 630s, had also considered the matter and accepted the Easter calculation according to the custom of Rome. 

The issue was therefore a question over the proper celebration of the most significant Christian feast, and the situation in Northumbria had resulted in visible disunity, even in the royal court.  Hence, Queen Eanfled, daughter of Edwin (and thus keeper of the Roman Easter) and her entourage observed Easter on a different day than did King Oswiu.  While one royal faction was celebrating Easter, the other would still be fasting during Finan found himself challenged by a certain Ronan, an Irishman who had been trained in Rome and who wished to see the Roman Easter established.  It was only in the time of Colmán, the third Ionan monk elected Bishop of Northumbria, that the conflict required royal attention and resolution.

== Convocation of the Synod ==
An important figure in the convocation of the synod was Alchfrith, Oswiu’s son and sub-king in Deira.  Henry Mayr-Harting considered him the “chief cause of trouble which led to the Synod”.<ref>Mayr-Harting, ''The Coming of Christianity to Anglo-Saxon England'', p. 107.</ref>  In the early 660s, he expelled Ionan monks from the monastery of Ripon and gave it to Wilfrid, a Northumbrian churchman who had recently returned from Rome.  Alchfrith’s position in the royal house, together with his promotion of Wilfrid (who would be the spokesperson for the Roman position at the synod), has contributed to the view that he was instrumental in arranging his father’s convocation of the synod.<ref> Mayr-Harting, ''The Coming of Christianity to Anglo-Saxon England'', p. 108.</ref>

The synod was held at Whitby abbey, monastery of Hilda, herself a powerful Northumbrian noble and adherent to the Ionan Easter.  The Ionan position was advocated by Colmán, Bishop of Northumbria.  In support of the Roman position, Eanfled had sent her chaplain Romanus, and the position was also taken by Frankish bishop who also held office in England.  Because of Agilbert’s inability to express the complicated arguments in Old English, which was for him a foreign language, Wilfrid was selected as the prime advocate for the Roman party.  King Oswiu presided over the synod and acted as the final judge, who would give his royal authority in support of one side or the other.

== Decision ==
Bishop Colmán argued the Ionan calculation of Easter on the following grounds that it was the practice of St. John the apostle and evangelist.  Wilfrid argued the Roman position on the following grounds (according to Bede's narrative): (1) it was the practice in Rome, where the apostles SS. Peter and Paul had “lived, taught, suffered, and are buried”, (2) it was the universal practice of the Church, even as far as Egypt, (3) the customs of the apostle John were particular to the needs of his community and his age and, since then, the Council of Nicaea and established a different practice, (4) Columba had done the best he could considering his knowledge, and thus his irregular practice is excusable, but the Ionan monks at present did not have the excuse of ignorance, and (5) whatever the case, no one has authority over Peter (and thus his successors, the Bishops of Rome).

Oswiu then asked both sides if they agreed that Peter had been given the keys to the kingdom of heaven by Christ and pronounced to be “the rock” on which the Church would be built, to which they agreed.  Oswiu then declared his judgment in favor of the holder of the keys, i.e. the Roman (and Petrine) practice.