thumb|नागराज के पास तेजाजी 
'''तेजाजी''' राजस्थान, मध्यप्रदेश और गुजरात प्रान्तों में लोकदेवता के रूप में पूजे जाते हैं। किसान वर्ग अपनी खेती की खुशहाली के लिये तेजाजी को पूजता है। तेजाजी के वंशज मध्यभारत के खिलचीपुर से आकर मारवाड़ मे बसे थे। नागवंश के धवलराव अर्थात धौलाराव के नाम पर धौल्या गौत्र शुरू हुआ। तेजाजी के बुजुर्ग उदयराज ने खड़नाल पर कब्जा कर अपनी राजधानी बनाया। खड़नाल परगने में 24 गांव थे।

तेजाजी ने ग्यारवीं शदी में गायों की डाकुओं से रक्षा करने में अपने प्राण दांव पर लगा दिये थे। वे जाटों में महत्वपूर्ण स्थान है। तेजाजी सत्यवादी और दिये हुये वचन पर अटल थे। उन्होंने अपने आत्म - बलिदान तथा सदाचारी जीवन से अमरत्व प्राप्त किया था। उन्होंने अपने धार्मिक विचारों से जनसाधारण को सद्मार्ग पर चलने के लिए प्रेरित किया और जनसेवा के कारण निष्ठा अर्जित की। जात - पांत की बुराइयों पर रोक लगाई। शुद्रों को मंदिरों में प्रवेश दिलाया। पुरोहितों के आडंबरों का विरोध किया। तेजाजी के मंदिरों में निम्न वर्गों के लोग पुजारी का काम करते हैं। समाज सुधार का इतना पुराना कोई और उदाहरण नहीं है। उन्होंने जनसाधारण के हृदय में हिन्दू धर्म के प्रति लुप्त विश्वास को पुन: जागृत किया। इस प्रकार  तेजाजी ने अपने सद्कार्यों एवं प्रवचनों से जन - साधारण में नवचेतना जागृत की, लोगों की जात - पांत में आस्था कम हो गई। 
==तेजाजी का जन्म==
तेजाजी का जन्म धौलिया या धौल्या गौत्र के जाट परिवार में हुआ। धौल्या शासकों की वंशावली इस प्रकार है:- 1.महारावल 2.भौमसेन 3.पीलपंजर 4.सारंगदेव 5.शक्तिपाल 6.रायपाल 7.धवलपाल 8.नयनपाल 9.घर्षणपाल 10.तक्कपाल 11.मूलसेन 12.रतनसेन 13.शुण्डल 14.कुण्डल 15.पिप्पल 16.उदयराज 17.नरपाल 18.कामराज 19.बोहितराव 20.ताहड़देव 21.तेजाजी

तेजाजी के बुजुर्ग उदयराज ने खड़नाल पर कब्जा कर अपनी राजधानी बनाया। खड़नाल परगने में 24 गांव थे। तेजाजी का जन्म खड़नाल के धौल्या गौत्र के जाट कुलपति ताहड़देव के घर में चौदस वार गुरु, शुक्ल माघ सत्रह सौ तीस को हुआ। तेजाजी के जन्म के बारे में मत है-

:जाट वीर धौलिया वंश गांव खरनाल के मांय। 

:आज दिन सुभस भंसे बस्ती फूलां छाय।। 

:शुभ दिन चौदस वार गुरु, शुक्ल माघ पहचान। 

:सहस्र एक सौ तीस में प्रकटे अवतारी ज्ञान।।

== तेजाजी का हळसौतिया ==
जेठ के महिने के अंत में तेज बारिश होगई। तेजाजी की माँ कहती है जा बेटा हळसौतिया तुम्हारे हाथ से कर- 

:गाज्यौ-गाज्यौ जेठ'र आषाढ़ कँवर तेजा रॅ 

:लगतो ही गाज्यौ रॅ सावण-भादवो 

:सूतो-सूतो सुख भर नींद कँवर तेजा रॅ 

:थारोड़ा साथिड़ा बीजॅं बाजरो।

सूर्योदय से पहले ही तेजाजी बैल, हल, बीजणा, पिराणी लेकर खेत जाते हैं और '''स्यावड़ माता''' का नाम लेकर बाजरा बीजना शुरू किया -

:उठ्यो-उठ्यो पौर के तड़कॅ कुँवर तेजा रॅ 

:माथॅ तो बांध्यो हो धौळो पोतियो 

:हाथ लियो हळियो पिराणी कँवर तेजा रॅ 

:बॅल्यां तो समदायर घर सूं नीसर्यो

:काँकड़ धरती जाय निवारी कुँवर तेजा रॅ

:स्यावड़ नॅ मनावॅ बेटो जाटको। 

:भरी-भरी बीस हळायां कुँवर तेजा रॅ 

:धोळी रॅ दुपहरी हळियो ढाबियो 

:धोरां-धोरां जाय निवार्यो कुँवर तेजा रॅ 

:बारह रॅ कोसां री बा'ई आवड़ी।।

== तेजाजी का भाभी से संवाद ==
नियत समय के उपरांत तेजाजी की भाभी छाक (रोटियां) लेकरआई। तेजाजी बोले-

:बैल्या भूखा रात का बिना कलेवे तेज।

:भावज थासूं विनती कठै लगाई जेज।।

देवर तेजाजी के गुस्से को भावज झेल नहीं पाई और काम से भी पीड़ित थी, उसने चिढने के लहजे में कहा-

:मण पिस्यो मण पोयो कँवर तेजा रॅ 

:मण को रान्यो खाटो खीचड़ो। 

:लीलण खातर दल्यो दाणों कँवर तेजा रॅ 

:साथै तो ल्याई भातो निरणी। 

:दौड़ी लारॅ की लारॅ आई कँवर तेजा रॅ

:म्हारा गीगा न छोड़ आई झूलै रोवतो। 

:ऐहड़ा कांई भूख भूखा कँवर तेजा रॅ 

:थारी तो परण्योड़ी बैठी बाप कॅ

भाभी का जवाब तेजाजी के कले जे में चुभ गया। तेजाजी नें रास और पुराणी फैंकदी और ससुराल जाने की कसम खा बैठे-

:ऐ सम्हाळो थारी रास पुराणी भाभी म्हारा ओ 

:अब म्हे तो प्रभात जास्यां सासरॅ 

:हरिया-हरिया थे घास चरल्यो बैलां म्हारा ओ 

:पाणिड़ो पीवो नॅ थे गैण तळाव रो।
== तेजाजी का माँ से संवाद ==
खेत से तेजाजी सीधे घर आये। तेजाजी नें कहा-माँ मेरी शादी कहाँ और किसके साथ हुई। तेजाजी की माँ को खरनाल और पनेर की दुश्मनी याद आ गई पर अब बताने को मजबूर होकर माँ बोली-

thumb|Tejaji 
thumb|Veer Tejaji
'''Veer Teja (Hindi:वीर तेजा)''' or '''Tejaji (Hindi:तेजाजी)''' (1074- 1103) was a folk-deity who lived in the state of Rajasthan in India. The history of Rajasthan is  filled with lots of heroic stories and instances where people have put their life and families at risk and kept the pride and values like loyalty, freedom, truth, shelter, social reform etc intact. Veer Teja was one of these famous people in the history of Rajasthan.
== Birth of Tejaji ==
Veer Teja ji is considered to be folk-deity and worshiped in entire Rajasthan by all communities. He was born on Friday, magha shukla 14 samvat 1130  (29 January 1074), in the family of Dhaulya gotra Jats. His father was Chaudhary Tahar, a chieftain of Khirnal in Nagaur district in Rajasthan. His mother’s name was Sugna. Mother Sugna is believed to have got son Teja ji by the blessings of Naga-deity.

== Genealogy of Tejaji==
The Genealogy of Tejaji is as under: The primeval man of their ancestry was Mahābal, whose descendants were Bhīmsen, Pīlapunjar, Sārangdev, Shaktipāl, Rāmpāl, Dhawalpāl, Nayanpāl, Gharṣanpāl, Takkapāl, Mūlsen, Ratansen, Śuṇḍal, Kuṇḍal, Pippal, Udayarāj, Narpāl, Kāmrāj, Vohitrāj and Ṭhirarāj or Taharji. 

Taharji had six sons namely - Siyag of village  Tabījī (तबीजी). Rājal had become sati with his brother Tejaji.

== History of Dhaulya clan ==
The ancestors of Tejaji were settled in Khilchipur in Madhya Pradesh. The Naga Jats of Marwar are from Vasuki or Ganapati Nagavanshi. The Dhaulya clan started after Dhawal Rao or Dhaula Rao ruler of Nagavansh. Swet Naga in Sanskrit is the Dhaulya Naga in prakrit language. Tejaji's ancestor Udairaj occupied Khirnal and made it his capital. There were twenty four villages in Khirnal pargana and area was quite extensive. This pargana of Khirnal was very famous during those.<ref>Mansukh Ranwa, Kshatriya Shiromani Veer Tejaji, 2001, p.13</ref>

==History==
During Tejaji's period the country was ruled by small republics which were in constant struggle with each other. Taharji, Tejaji's father, was the Chieftain of Kharnal. There were conflicts between Nagavanshi is and Aryans. Nagavanshis were bent upon to destroy the Aryans. According to Hindu mythology, During Mahabharata period, Parīkśita the successor of Yudhisthira, was the ruler of Hastinapura. Parikshita was cursed by a sage's son to die after snake bite. On hearing this, the king forswore the throne for his son Janamejaya and spent his last days listening to the discourses of Sage Sukadeva on Bhagwat. As prophecised, Snake king Takshaka bit Parikshita leading to his death. In fact Takshaka was a nagavanshi King who killed Parikshita.

== Story of Tejaji's sacrifice ==
As per the tradition in that area, the chieftain had to initiate the ploughing of fields after first rains in jyestha month. Tejaji's father and brother were out of the village at first rains so his mother asked Tejaji to do the halsotiya in the fields. Tejaji went to fields and started ploughing. His bhabhi became late in fetching his food locally called Chhak, which angered tejaji. On Tejaji's anger she taunted that his wife was in her father's home and it was shame on his part. This prompted him to go to bring his wife from in-laws. Bhabhi asked Tejaji that before he brings his wife Pemal, he should bring his sister Rajal so that she can receive Pemal on her first arrival to Kharnal. Tejājī was married to Pemal in early childhood at Pushkar with the daughter of Rai Mal Jat of Jhanjhar gotra, chieftain of village Paner . After marriage there was a dispute between two families in which ''māmā'' of Pemal and father of Tejaji were killed. Tejaji did not know that he was married. 

When Tejaji was on way to village Tabiji to bring his sister, he was attacked by Meena sardar. There was a war and Tejaji was victorious. He reached village Tabiji, got permission of her sister's husband Jogaji Siyag and brought Rajal to Kharnal.

Next day early in the morning he mounted his mare Līlaṇ with palāṇ and started journey to Paner to bring his wife Pemal. It was a difficult journey, but he crossed all the Rivers running full of water  due to heavy rains. He reached Paner by evening. At that time his mother-in-law was milking cows. The cows got disturbed due to Tejaji's brisk entry on his mare. His mother-in-law could not recognize Tejaji and cursed him that he be bite by a black snake as he has disturbed her cows. Tejaji got angry over this comment and decided to return without Pemal.

Lachha Gujari was a friend of Pemal. Her house was about 2 km from Rupangarh. Lachhan Gujari  helped Pemal to meet with Teja. For this Lachhan rode on camel and went to Teja facing many clashes with Meena sardars en route. Lachhan reached Teja and gave Pemal's message that if Tejaji does not come she will die. Parents of Pemal had decided to re-marriage her with some other person. At this time Pemal was going to die but saved by Lachhan. Tejaji came to Paner and saw her there. Pemal was a beautiful and attractive girl. They were talking with each other that they heard knock of Lachha Gujari. Lachha told Tejaji that thieves have taken away all her cows and there is no body in this to help. Tejaji mounted his mare Lilan and started alone to fight with dacoits, who had taken away Lachha's cows.
==A man of words==

Tejaji found that dacoits who had stolen the cows of Lachhan Gujari were Gujari's cows back from dacoits. Veer Teja was man of words. While returning he kept his words and produced himself before the snake. The snake did not find unwounded place on the body of Teja so he offered to bite on tongue. The snakebite was on tongue of Teja. Teja died due to snakebite on 28 August 1103. 

Historical facts are that while Tejaji was returning from Paner with his wife he was attacked jointly by Meenas, who were defeated earlier and Nagavanshi chieftains. Tejaji and his wife fought bravely with sword. Tejaji was killed in the war and Pemal became sati at place called Sursura. Tejaji's sister Rajal had also become sati which is a unique example of sister becoming sati in the Indian history.