thumb|right|300px|Milt Jackson-Village Jazz Lounge with the Bubba Kolb Trio-late 70's.
'''Milton (Milt) Jackson''' (January 1, 1923 in Detroit, Michigan &ndash; October 9, 1999) was an American jazz vibraphonist and one of the most important figures in the hard bop style, although he performed in several subgenres of jazz.  A very expressive player, Jackson differentiated himself from other vibraphonists in his attention to variations on harmonics and rhythm. He was particularly fond of the 12-bar blues at slow tempos. He preferred to set the vibraphone's oscillator to a low 3.3 revolutions per second (as opposed to Lionel Hampton's speed of 10 revolutions per second) for a more subtle vibrato. Jackson was also a capable pianist, and sometimes performed professionally on that instrument.  He also occasionally sang.

==Biography==
thumb|right|Milt Jackson (left) circa 1980 in Seattle, Washington
He was discovered by John Lewis, Percy Heath, and Kenny Clarke while the horn section took a break from the demanding high-register horn parts. This group, known around 1950 as the Milt Jackson Quartet, eventually became the Modern Jazz Quartet (MJQ) by around 1952, and had a long independent career of some 20 years until disbanding in 1974 when Jackson split with Lewis in an attempt to make more money on his own (though it reformed in 1981 and last recorded in 1993).  Jackson then toured alone, performing in various small combos. 

From the mid-70s to the mid-80s, Jackson recorded for Ray Brown on bass, backed by John Collins, and drummer Roy McCurdy.

He also guested on recordings by many leading jazz, blues and soul artists, such as B.B. King, Ray Charles, etc.

His composition "Bags' Groove" ("Bags" was a nickname given to him by a bass player in Detroit. The 'bags' was his collapsing vibraphone that he often carried on his back in a 'bag' to his gigs. "Bags" also referred to his habit of staying up all night.  Bag's Groove is a jazz standard.  He has been featured on the NPR radio program Jazz Profiles.

He died on October 9, 1999, aged 76. Jackson was a resident of Teaneck, New Jersey.<ref>Ratliff, Ben. [http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9E00E1DE1630F932A25753C1A96F958260 "Milt Jackson, 76, Jazz Vibraphonist, Dies"], ''The New York Times'', October 11, 1999. Accessed November 4, 2007. "Milt Jackson, the jazz vibraphonist who was a member of the Modern Jazz Quartet for 40 years and was one of the premier improvisers in jazz with a special brilliance at playing blues, died on Saturday at St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan. He was 76 and lived in Teaneck, N.J."</ref>

'''Milton (Milt) Jackson''' (Detroit (Manhattan (New York), 9 oktober 1999) was een legendarische jazz-vibrafonist, die vooral bekend werd met het ''Modern Jazz Quartet'', een van de langstbestaande bands in de geschiedenis van de jazz. De populariteit van dit viertal muzikanten was, aldus Jackson, vooral te danken aan de manier waarop geïmproviseerd werd op klassieke muziek, wat leidde tot een combinatie van klassiek met jazz en pop.

Jackson begon op 7-jarige leeftijd als zanger. Hij zong gospel-duetten met zijn broer Alvin. Later speelde hij ook nog piano en ontwikkelde hij zijn muzikaliteit op de middelbare school. Uiteindelijk kwam hij uit bij de vibrafoon, vanwege de gelijkenissen die het instrument toont met de menselijke stem.

Milt Jackson is bijna 60 jaar lang actief geweest in de muziek en heeft samengewerkt met pioniers als Miles Davis, Dizzy Gillespie, Charlie Parker, Thelonious Monk en Coleman Hawkins. Tijdens zijn carrière won hij onder andere de National Music Award, de French Bicentennial Award en een eredoctoraat van de Berklee College of Music in Boston, Massachusetts. Bovendien heeft hij plaatsen verworven in de Percussion Hall Of Fame en Downbeat Magazine's Hall Of Fame.