thumb|Briškula, izgled karata
'''Briškula''' (od talijanskog izvornika Briscola) je talijanska kartaška igra udomaćena na hrvatskom priobalju i otocima. Iznimno je popularna i lako se uči. 

Najčešće se igra s tršćanskim kartama (tal. Carte Triestine). Ima 40 karata u jednom "'''macu'''" (špilu). Po istim osnovnim pravilima igra se obična i dupla briškula. '''Običnu briškulu''' igraju dva igrača ili u parovima (ukupno četiri igrača), a rijetko kada više igrača (3 ili 5), svatko za sebe. '''Dupla briškula''' se igra u dvoje. 

Postoje različite varijacije igre i pravila, a ovdje je opisan način igre u Splitu i okolici.

== Miješanje i dijeljenje karata ==

Svi igrači naizmjenično, po redu, miješaju i dijele karte. Pravilno je dijeliti karte u smjeru suprotnom od kretanja kazaljki na satu . Nakon miješanja karata, prethodni djelitelj prediže karte ili "'''tuče'''" (udara rukom po macu). 

Ako su karte predignute, djelitelj dijeli:

a) u običnoj briškuli, po jednu kartu svakom igraču naizmjenično, ukupno tri karte svakome,

b) u duploj briškuli, po dvije karte svakom igraču naizmjenično, ukupno po četiri karte.

Nakon pola podijeljenih karata okreće se jedna karta licem prema gore i na nju se stavlja preostali mac karata, nakon završetka dijeljenja preostalih karata.

Ako su karte tučene (nisu predignute), djelitelj dijeli:

c) u običnoj briškuli po tri karte odjednom svakom igraču,

d) u duploj briškuli po četiri karte karte odjednom svakom igraču.

Na kraju dijeljenja okreće se jedna karta licem prema gore i na nju se stavlja preostali mac karata.

== Pravila igre == 

Okrenuta karta ispod maca, predstavlja "'''zog'''" (boju), u koji se igra. Taj zog je jači od svih ostalih, a za to dijeljenje predstavlja '''briškulu'''.

Postoje 4 zoga: '''kupe''' (kope), '''bate''' (baštone), '''špade''' i '''dinare'''. Unutar svakog zoga postoje karte od broja 1-7 i od 11-13. Unutar jednog zoga, najjači je '''as''' ('''aš''') (1), pa '''trica''' (3), pa '''kralj''' (13), '''konj''' (12), '''fanat''' (11) i dalje od sedmice (7) prema dvici (2). As i trica se još zovu i "'''karik'''" ('''korga''', '''karig'''). 

As se broji kao 11 '''punata''' (bodova), trica vrijedi 10 punata, a karte 2 i  4-7 zovi se "'''lišine'''" ili "škart" i ne donose punte. Kralj vrijedi 4 punta, konj 3, a fanat 2 punta. Ove zadnje 3 karte sa slikama, se u igri zbirno nazivaju – '''figure''' ili '''punti'''. Ima ukupno 120 punata, tako da partija može završiti i neriješeno.

Igrači bacaju po jednu kartu naizmjenično, dok svi ne bace, a zatim najjača strana pokupi bačene karte. Time je završila jedna "'''ruka'''" te '''partije'''. Nakon toga svaki igrač, počevši od pobjednika te ruke, "'''peška'''" (uzima) po jednu kartu s maca i započinje nova ruka, i tako dok se ne odigraju sve karte. Izuzetno, u duploj bruškuli, ako se igra u dvoje, svaki igrač baca po dvije karte u svakoj odigranoj ruci, jednu po jednu, a isto tako i peškaje 2 karte s maca, jednu po jednu.

Igru započinje igrač kojemu su prvom podijeljene karte. Bačena karta predstavlja zog u kojemu se igra ta ruka. Igrač s najjačom kartom te ruke, kupi karte, prvi uzima novu kartu s maca i započinje novu ruku. Prva bačena karta može se "'''ubiti'''":

'''Briscola''' (''brìscula'' in Sicilian, ''brìšcula'' or ''brišc'' in Neapolitan, ''briškula'' in Croatian, ''la brisca'' in Spanish, ''bisca'' in Portuguese, ''briškola'' in Slovenian) is an Italian trick-taking Italian 40-card deck. Alternatively, it can be played with a modern Anglo-French deck, without the eight, nine and ten cards (see Portuguese variations below). The game is also popular in Croatia, Puerto Rico, Slovenia, Spain and Portugal. With three or six players, twos are removed from the deck to ensure the number of cards in the deck is a multiple of the number of players; a single two for three players and all four twos for six players. The four- and six-player versions of the game are played as a partnership game of two teams, with players seated such that every player is adjacent to two opponents. 

==The Cards==
thumb|A set of Modiano cards "napoletane"
A deck of Italian cards consist of 40 cards, divided into four suits: Suns, Cups, Swords, and Clubs (or batons).  The values on the cards range numerically from one through seven, plus three face cards in each suit: Knave [Fante in Italian], Knight [Cavallo in Italian], and King [Re in Italian].  A Knave is a lone human figure standing.  The Knight is a human figure riding a horse.  The King is a human figure wearing a crown.  To determine the face value of any numeric card, simply count the number of suit icons on the card. The ace card of coins is usually a type of bird with  circle in the middle.

Below is a table identifying card rank and point values. Unlisted cards have no point value, and are ranked in descending ordinal value, from seven to two. Note however the odd ranking of the three.

{| style="padding: 0.5em; border: 1px solid #99cc99;" width="60%" align="center"
|+Rank and point value of cards
|- 
! align="left" | Cards, by Rank
! align="right" | Point Value
|- 
| Ace (asso)
| align="right" | 11
|- 
| Three (3) (trè)
| align="right" | 10
|- 
| King (re)
| align="right" | 4
|- 
| Knight (or Horse) (cavallo)
| align="right" | 3
|- 
| Knave  (or Jack) (fante)
| align="right" | 2
|} 

In total, a deck has 120 points. To win a game, a player must accumulate more points than any other player.

==Game play==
After the deck is shuffled, each player is dealt three cards. The next card is placed face up on the playing surface, and the remaining deck is placed face down, sometimes covering half of the up-turned card. This card is the ''Briscola'', and represents the trump suit for the game. The deal, and game play itself, proceeds counter-clockwise.

The player to the right of the dealer leads the first hand (or trick) by playing one card face up on the playing surface. Each player subsequently plays a card in turn, until all players have played one card. The winner of that hand is determined as follows:

* if any ''briscola'' (trump) has been played, the player who played the highest valued trump wins
* if no ''briscole'' (trumps) have been played, the player who played the highest card of the lead suit wins

Unlike other trump card games, players are not required to ''follow suit'', that is, to play the same suit as the lead player.

Once the winner of a trick is determined, that player collects the played cards, and places them face down in a pile. Each player maintains his/her own pile, though the four- and six-player versions may have one player collecting all tricks won by his partners. Then, each player draws a card from the remaining deck, starting with the player who won the trick, proceeding counter-clockwise. Note that the last card collected in the game should be the up-turned ''Briscola''. The player who won the trick leads the next hand. Before the last hand, people in the same team can look at each other's cards.

After all cards have been played, players calculate the total point value of cards in their own piles. For multi-player games, partners combine their points.

There also exists a variation whereby the three, is ranked as a three (i.e. a four can beat it) but maintains its status as worth 10 points. However, as mentioned, this is a variation, and not standard rules.

==Briscola Chiamata==
'''Briscola Chiamata''' (English: ''declaration Briscola'') is the five-player version of Briscola. Every player is dealt eight cards, so that no cards remain undealt. Then, each player, starting from the dealer's right and proceeding counter-clockwise, bids in an auction to declare how many points they will score. A player may pass, and hence cannot bid again in that game. The bid represents the number of points that player believes he is capable of accumulating. Bidding continues until all but one player have passed in a round. This remaining player has then "won the bid" and therefore gets to declare the ''Briscola'', i.e. the trump suit. The declarer also declares a specific Briscola card (example, the "Ace of Cups" if Cups was the declared Briscola) and the holder of this card is then determined to be the declarer's partner. Typically, the declarer would  declare the highest Briscola card he does not already hold in the hopes of creating the strongest combined hand between him and his partner.

The remaining three players are partnered with each other, without their knowledge. Each player, other than the declarer's partner, acts independently, until it is clear which players are partners. Infrequently, the declarer may declare a Briscola card he already holds (if he feels he has a very strong hand), in which case the other four players are partenered against him.

Because of the unique method of declaration and blind partnering in this variation of the game, it is considered to be one of the most entertaining variations of the game. Game strategy is often devised to determine which player is partnered with the declarer, whereas the declarer's partner may devise ruses and decoy strategies to fool the other players, such as not taking a trick, or playing points on a trick that will be won by an opponent.

===Scoring===
Briscola Chiamata also features a unique scoring scheme. Each player collects tricks as per the regular version of the game, and counts points collected similarly. Partners, which are known by the end of the game, then combine their points. Game points are assigned as follows:

* if the declarer and partner accumulate card points greater than or equal to the points that were declared after the bidding process
** the declarer earns two game points
** the partner earns one game point
** the other players each lose one game point
* if the declarer and partner accumulate fewer card points than declared
** the declarer loses two game points
** the partner loses one game point
** the other players each earn one game point