'''Chayba Ibn Hashim''', plus connu sous le nom d'Amina en Abdallah étant mort peu après sa naissance en 570.

== Biographie ==
=== Le fils de Hashim et l' « esclave » d'Al-Muttalib ===
Abd al-Muttalib est le fils de Hashim, membre influent de Quraïch.<br/>
Ce dernier mourut à Gaza, avant la naissance de son fils Chayba. L'enfant fut donc élevé par son oncle paternel Al-Muttalib. De là vient donc l'appellation « Abd al-Muttalib », signifiant littéralement « esclave d'Al-Muttalib ».<br/>
Chayba est né à Yathrib, selon une condition fixée par Zayd avant le mariage de sa fille Salma avec Hashim : les enfants devraient naître et être élevés à Yathrib. Cependant, après la mort de Hashim, Al-Muttalib vint à Yathrib pour voir Zayd et lui demanda d'emmener Chayba avec lui à la Mecque.<br/>
Il obtint la permission, et emmena donc Chayba avec lui.

Lorsque les mecquois l'interrogèrent sur l'origine du garçon, al-Muttalib répondit que c'était son esclave, d'où le nom qu'il porta le reste de sa vie : Abd al-Muttalib.<br/>
L'identité réelle de Chayba fut révélée aux mecquois plusieurs années après, par al-Muttalib, qui leur révélé également la paternité du jeune homme. 

Al-Muttalib mourut au Yémen, et Abd al-Muttalib prit sa succession.

=== Les puits de la Mecque ===
Plus tard, Abd al-Muttalib reçut en songe l'ordre de creuser les quatre puits des pélerins de la Mecque : Tayyiba, Barra, al-Madnouna et Zamzam.<br/>
Il creusa entre les deux idoles Asaf et Naila, situées près de la Ka'ba. Cela provoqua la colère des habitants, qui laissèrent malgré tout Chayba creuser le puits. Cet emplacement avait déjà été utilisé auparavant, et au fond, Abd al-Muttalib déterra deux gazelles en or ainsi que des épées et des boucliers.<br/>
Il informa les mecquois que l'eau du puits servirait en priorité aux pélerins, et décida de conserver le trésor déterré, à l'exception des gazelles, qui devaient être placées de part et d'autre de l'entrée de la Ka'ba, et les épées qui devaient en orner l'intérieur.

Il souhaita posséder dix fils, et promit que s'il les obtenait, en sacrifierait un près de la Ka'ba. 

'''Shaiba ibn Hashim''' () (c. 497 &ndash; 578), better known as  or '''Abd al-Muttalib''', since he was raised by his uncle Muttalib, was the grandfather of Muhammad and Ali (the fourth Caliph).

==Early life==
His father was Hashim ibn Abd Manaf and his mother was Salma bint Amr from the tribe of an-Najjar in Yathrib. On his fathers side he belonged to the distinguished Banu Hashim clan, a subgroup of the Quraysh tribe of Mecca which traced their genealogy to Ismail and Ibrahim. In 497 his father died while doing business in Gaza, Palestine before he was born.

He was given the name "''Shaiba''", meaning ''old man'' in Arabic, because he was born with a few white hairs. After his fathers death he was raised in Yathrib with his mother and her family until about the age of eight, when his uncle Muttalib ibn Abd al-Manaf came to take him to Mecca. Upon first arriving in Mecca, the people assumed the unknown child was Muttalib's slave, giving him the name ''`Abdu'l-Muttalib'' (slave of Muttalib). When Muttalib died, Shaiba succeeded him as the chief of the Banu Hashim clan. It is not possible to give the whole history of `Abdu'l-Muttalib, but two important events will be included: the recovery of Zamzam and the attempted attack on the Kaaba by Abraha, the governor of Ethiopia in Yemen.

==Zamzam==
Hundreds of years before its time, the well of Zamzam in Mecca was filled up and nobody knew its location. One day, `Abdu'l-Muttalib had a series of four dreams directing him to Zamzam's location. `Abdu'l-Muttalib, with his eldest son, Harith ibn ‘Abd al-Muttalib, dug the location where Zamzam is today, finding water after four days of effort. At this success, the Quraish argued that since the well was the property of Ismail, it belonged to the whole tribe. `Abdu'l-Muttalib rejected their claim, saying that it was given to him by Allah.  

They agreed to present their case to a wise woman of the tribe of Sa'd in Syria. During the trip, `Abdu'l-Muttalib's water reserves were depleted and his group suffering from thirst. The leaders of the other parties refused to give them water and `Abdu'l-Muttalib advised his group to dig graves, so that when someone died others could bury him. 

The next day, `Abdu'l-Muttalib exhorted his companions that it was cowardice to succumb to death. He mounted his camel and its foot hit the earth producing a stream of water. The different caravans drank from the fountain and said: "''Allah has decided between you and us. By Allah, we will never dispute with you about Zamzam. The same Allah who has created this fountain here in this desert for you has given Zamzam to you''."

==The Year of the Elephant== 
According to Muslim tradition, the Ethiopian governor of Yemen, Abraha al-Ashram, envied the Kaaba's reverence among the Arabs and, being a Christian, he built a cathedral in Sanaa and ordered pilgrimage be made there. The order was ignored and someone desecrated the cathedral. Abraha decided to avenge this act by demolishing the Kaaba and he advanced with an army towards Mecca. 

* NOTE: It is believed the desecration was in the form of defecation.

There were many elephants in Abraha's army and the year came to be known as '''Am al-Fil'' (Year of the Elephant), beginning a trend for reckoning the years in Arabia which was used until Umar ibn al ­Khattab replaced it with the Islamic Calendar. 

When news of the advance of Abraha's army came, the Arab tribes of Quraish, Banu Kinanah, Banu Khuza'a and Banu Hudhayl united in defense of the Kaaba. A man from the Himyar tribe was sent by Abraha to advise them that Abraha only wished to demolish the Kaaba and if they resisted, they would be crushed. `Abdu'l-Muttalib told the Meccans to seek refuge in the hills while he with some leading members of Quraish, remained within the precincts of the Kaaba. Abraha sent a dispatch inviting `Abdu'l-Muttalib to meet with Abraha and discuss matters. When `Abdu'l-Muttalib left the meeting he was heard saying, "''The Owner of this House is its Defender, and I am sure He will save it from the attack of the adversaries and will not dishonor the servants of His House''." 

It is recorded that when the Abraha's forces neared the Kaaba, Allah commanded small birds which destroyed Abrah's army with raining pebbles from their beaks. Abraha was seriously wounded and he retreated towards Yemen but died on the way. 

This event is referred to in the Qur'an, chapter 105 Al-Fil: 

''Have you not seen how your Lord dealt with the owners of the Elephant? Did He not make their treacherous plan go astray? And He sent against them birds in flocks, striking them with stones of baked clay, so He rendered them like straw eaten up.'' (Qur'an, 105) 