thumb|300 px|Former Deputies of disbanded [[State Duma (Imperial)|State Duma arrive from Saint Petersburg to Vyborg to sign the Manifesto]]

The '''Kadets and Laborist politicians, former deputies of the disbanded Russian First State Duma on July 9 1906. 

The Constitutional Democratic Party was formed in Moscow on 18, Nicholas II was forced to sign the October Manifesto granting basic civil liberties. The Kadets were to the immediate Left of the Octobrists, another liberal party organized at the same time. Unlike the Octobrists, who were committed to constitutional monarchy from the start, the Kadets were at first ambiguous on the subject, demanding universal suffrage (even women's suffrage) and a Constituent Assembly that would determine the country's form of government. The Kadets were one of the parties invited by the reform-minded Prime Minister Sergei Witte to join his cabinet in October-November 1905, but the negotiations broke down over the Kadets' radical demands and Witte's refusal to drop notorious reactionaries like Petr Nikolayevich Durnovo from the cabinet.

With some socialist and revolutionary parties boycotting the election to the First State Duma in February Social Democrat deputies went to Vyborg (then a part of the autonomous Grand Duchy of Finland and thus beyond the reach of Russian police) and responded with the  Vyborg Manifesto (or the "Vyborg Appeal"), written by Pavel Milyukov. In the manifesto, they called for passive resistance, non-payment of taxes and draft avoidance. The appeal failed to have an effect on the population at large and proved both ineffective and counterproductive, leading to a ban on its authors', including the entire Kadet leadership, participation in future Dumas.

thumb|200px|ヴィボルグに到着した元ドゥーマ議員たち
thumb|right|200px|声明文
                                                               
'''ヴィボルグ・アピール'''（Выборгское воззвание、Vyborg Appeal、Vyborg Manifesto）とは、1906年7月にロシア皇帝の統治下にあったヴィボルグ（現在はフィンランドに属する）で、ドゥーマ（ロシアの国会）議員によって示された声明。「'''ヴィボルグの檄'''」などとも称される。

==概要==
1906年4月23日、皇帝ニコライ2世によって憲法（国家基本法）が発布された。その4日後にドゥーマ（国会）が開かれたが、ツァーリ政府との対立から7月上旬に解散させられた。カデット、トルドヴィキ、社会民主労働党の所属していた元議員たちはペテルブルクを離れ、フィンランド大公国（大公はロシア皇帝）のヴィボルグにあるホテルに集結した。最終的には、167人によってヴィボルグ・アピールが示され、ドゥーマの再召集まで納税、徴兵を拒否することを人民に呼びかけた。ただし、中産階級を支持層とするカデットでは、この声明をめぐって各地で意見をまとめられないなど、実際の影響は限定的なものとなった。