L''''Accademia di danza Vaganova''' è una delle scuole di Grace di Monaco.
Da questa scuola sono usciti i più grandi ballerini di tutti i tempi, da Anna Pavlova a Rudolf Nureyev, da Natalia Makarova a Mikhail Baryshnikov, da Farukh Ruzimatov  a Uliana Lopatkina,  Diana Vishneva, Igor Zelensky, Svetlana Zakharova, Andrian Fadeyev.

==Storia==
L'accademia fu fondata a San Pietroburgo il 4 maggio 1738, con un decreto imperiale, dall'imperatrice Anna Ivanovna di Russia con il nome di "'''Scuola del Teatro Imperiale'''".
Il primo insegnante della scuola fu il francese viennese Franz Hilverding, l'italiano Gasparo Angiolini ma soprattutto il coreografo francese Charles Didelot. Didelot giunse a San Pietroburgo da Parigi all'inizio dell'Ottocento (1801) e vi restò fino alla morte, insegnando e coreografando per oltre vent'anni. Egli contribuì in modo determinante alla formazione dei nuovi ballerini, portandoli a livelli altissimi e facendo crescere la fama della scuola russa. La prima grande ballerina da lui formata fu Avdotia Ilinicna Istomina, una vera stella dell'epoca ma sconosciuta all'estero in quanto non uscì mai dai confini della Russia. 

Altri coreografi vennero in seguito quali La bella addormentata'', ''Lo schiaccianoci'', ''Raymonda'',  ''La Bayadere''.

The '''Vaganova Academy of Russian Ballet''' is probably the most famous and influential classical ballet school in the world.  It has also been known as the '''Imperial Ballet School''' and the '''Vaganova Choreographic Institute'''.

Established in 1738, the academy is based in St. Petersburg, Russia and is named after the renowned pedagogue Agrippina Vaganova, who cultivated the method of classical ballet training that is taught at the school.  Graduates of the school include some of the most famous ballet dancers, choreographers and teachers in history and many of the worlds leading ballet schools have adopted elements of the Vaganova method into their own training.

The ''Vaganova Ballet Academy'' is the associate school of the ''Mariinsky Ballet'', one of the Worlds leading ballet companies, although students of the school are successful in achieving employment with ballet and contemporary companies worldwide, such as the Bolshoi Ballet, The Royal Ballet and American Ballet Theatre.

==History==
The school was established as the ''Imperial Theatrical School'' by Imperial decree of the Empress Anna on  Mariinsky Balet (a.k.a. the Kirov Ballet)'', which remains one of the worlds leading ballet companies to this day, with the Vaganova Academy as its associate school.

Nearly all the early teachers at the school were from Western Europe, including Franz Hilferding and Giovanni Canzianni. The school experienced it The first Russian teacher at the school was Ivan Valberg.  After the spread of ballet in Europe, the development of the school was influenced by a number of other teachers and methods, including Christian Johannson, a student of August Bournonville, and the Italian methods of Enrico Cecchetti, Pierina Legnani and Carlotta Brianza.  Other renowned 19th century dancers and ballet masters who taught at and were influential in the development in the school include Charles Didelot, Jules Perrot, Arthur Saint-Léon, Lev Ivanov, Marius Petipa and Mikhail Fokine.

Since 1836 the school has been situated on Rossi Street in St Petersburg.  Following the upheaval of the Soviet Government and later re-established on the same site, as the ''Leningrad State Choreographic School''.  The ''Imperial Russian Ballet'' was also dissolved as a result of the revolution and was re-established as the ''Soviet Ballet''.  The company was later renamed the ''Kirov Ballet'' following the assassination of the Bolshevic revolutionary Sergey Kirov in 1938.  Despite later being given the current name ''Mariinsky Ballet'', the company is still commonly known as the ''Kirov Ballet'' by the majority of Western audiences and the company still use the title ''Kirov Ballet'' when touring internationally.

It was also following the Russian revolution that Agrippina Vaganova joined the school as a teacher in 1920.

==Vaganova==

Vaganova graduated from the former ''Imperial Ballet School'' in 1897 and danced with the ''Imperial Ballet'', retiring from the stage early to pursue her teaching career following the Russian revolution.  As the Soviet Government had not yet re-established the school at that time, Vaganova began her teaching career at the privately owned ''School of Russian Ballet'' eventually joining the new ''Leningrad State Choreographic School'' in 1920.  Vaganova was to become possibly the most renowned ballet teacher of all time and is most noted for authoring "The Principles of Classical Dance", which outlines the training system which she created and heads the list of numerous works produced by teachers of the school. 

Vaganova's students would become some of the most famous ballet dancers of all time and in recognition of her achievements, the school was named in her honour in 1957, six years after her death.  There are a number of variations in the name of the school, but the official title in current use is the ''Vaganova Ballet Academy''.