{{Infobox VG
| title     = Odin Sphere
| image     = 250px|Odin Sphere cover art|
| caption = Cada um dos protagonistas de ''Odin Sphere''<nowiki>'s</nowiki> aparecem na capa. Começando abaixo da palavra "Odin" e indo em sentido horário, eles são a valquíria Gwendolyn, Cavaleiro Negro Oswald, princesa órfã Velvet (no fundo, de vermelho), Princesa Fada Mercedes, Alice (no centro), o príncipe amaldiçoado em forma de coelho Cornelius e o príncipe Ingway.
| Desenvolvimento = Atlus<br />Vanillaware
| Publicação = Atlus<br />
| designer  = 
| Lançado  = <br />
<br /> 
| Gênero     = Ação RPG
| Modo     = 1 Jogador
| ratings   = 
| Platforma = PlayStation 2
}}
Odin Sphere é um jogo de gráficos em 2D. É considerado o sucessor espiritual de Princess Crown, feito para Sega Saturn com remake para PSP.

==Personagens==

Os heróis são caracterizados por usarem todos o mesmo tipo de arma, as Psyphers:

*'''Gwendolyn''' - A Valquíria, filha do Demon Lord Odin, ganha sua Psypher(uma lança) de sua irmão Griselda.
*'''Velvet''' - A Bruxa, princesa do reino Valantine, sua Psypher é uma corrente com duas pontas.
*'''Oswald''' - O guerreiro das trevas, sua Psypher(espada) lhe é dada pelo seu pai adotivo, Melvin, do reino das fadas.
*'''Cornelius''' - Príncipe de Titania, por conta de uma maldição torna-se um Pooka, ganha sua Psypher(espada) de um ser misterioso no mundo dos mortos.
*'''Mercedes''' - A jovem fada princesa de seu reino, ganha seu Psypher(Arco) de sua mãe, Queen Elfaria.

{{Infobox VG
| title     = Odin Sphere
| image     = 250px|Odin Sphere cover art|
| caption = Each of ''Odin Sphere''<nowiki>'s</nowiki> protagonists are featured on the cover. Starting below "Odin" and going clockwise, they are the valkyrie Gwendolyn, Shadow Knight Oswald, orphaned princess Velvet (in the background in red), fairy princess Mercedes, Alice (front center fore), the rabbit-shaped cursed prince Cornelius and prince Ingway.
| developer = Atlus<br />Vanillaware
| publisher = Atlus<br />
| designer  = 
| released  = <br />
<br /> 
| genre     = Action RPG
| modes     = Single player
| ratings   = ESRB: T
| platforms = PlayStation 2
}}

 is a 2D action RPG Developed by localized and published by Atlus for the PlayStation 2 in 2007, it tells the interlocking stories of five different protagonists.  ''Odin Sphere'' is considered a spiritual successor to an Atlus game called ''Princess Crown''. Square Enix released the game in Europe on March 14, 2008.

''Odin Sphere'' has five stories. The protagonist of each story is connected to the royalty of each of five warring nations in the world of Erion. Each of these protagonists wields a Psypher, a weapon with a large crystal capable of absorbing Phozons, energy sparks released when something (such as an enemy) is slain. These five stories overlap and interconnect, and indeed the protagonist of one story may be the antagonist of another.

==Gameplay==

''Odin Sphere'' is divided into several chapters, during which the story of one of the five playable characters progressively unfolds.  Within each chapter, the player can obtain information relating to the upcoming "mission" and buy and sell goods prior to setting off to the next destination.  There is an overarching chronological story that is split among the 5 characters, with their individual stories intersecting at places (for example, early on within Gwendolyn's progression, Gwendolyn will fight Velvet, an event duplicated in Velvet's story progression.)  As a result, the player will slowly experience the entire sequence of events within the story from each characters' limited point of view.  Only one character story is available at the start, but as the player completes those stories, the "books" for other characters unlock one at a time.

Within each destination is a series of smaller boards or levels connected in a bidirectional graph; these levels include regular combat levels, shop levels, and minor and major boss levels.  Regular combat levels are marked with a 1 to 5 star rating indicating their difficulty, allowing the player to opt to avoid a path if it's too difficult at their current ability level. The two minor boss encounters will be indicated by a blue "B", while the major boss is denoted with a red "B". Defeating the major boss will advance the story to the next chapter. A shop level will instead feature a salesman ready to sell and buy goods. 

In each regular combat or minor boss level, if the player has not yet completed that level, they will need to defeat all the foes in order to leave that level.  The player will receive a fixed level reward for this, as well as additional rewards for outstanding performance, including using less time to complete the level, and taking minimal damage.  Once this is completed, exits to other nodes on the area map will be open for travel.  If a player revisits a completed level, they can directly travel to an exit, or wait to fight foes that appear.

Levels are represented in 2D as a large circle; the player can continue to run in one direction and will return to the starting point after some seconds of travel.  A radar map, similar to the one in Defender, shows the position of the player, enemies, and objects on the level, while a smaller map shows the location of the exits from the level.  Combat is similar to many 2D fighting games, though includes a "power bar" representing how many consecutive actions the player has performed without pausing.  Should the power bar empty, the player must wait a few moments for the power bar to refill while the character stands vulnerable in an exhausted state; however, a player can refill the power bar faster by stopping actions for a short period of time while still retaining control of the character.

thumb|Gwendolyn's prelude
There are three additional aspects to ''Odin Sphere'''s gameplay:

;Psypher Weapons and Phozons
:Each character has a weapon called a "psypher" made of crystals from the Netherworld, which can be used to absorb "phozons" from defeated foes and other sources.  As the weapons absorb more Phozons they will increase in power, doing more damage and providing new magic for the player to use.  Magic requires consumption of a certain number of Phozons, though does not detract from the Psypher level.

;Alchemy
:The player can combine two items within the inventory to generate a new item, following specific alchemy recipes learned through gameplay.  Most of these items require a "Material" bottle which the alchemy result is stored into.  Material bottles can be improved in level by alchemizing two of them together to get a material bottle valued at the multiplicative product of the two original bottles (for example, Material 2 alchemized with Material 3 will give a Material 6 bottle).  Certain alchemy recipes require a Material bottle of a certain level. Material bottles release Phozons when made into an alchemy recipe, with higher material levels yielding higher amounts.

;Plants, Food and Cooking
:The player has the ability to plant seeds in the current level.  Most plant seeds require a fixed number of Phozons to grow (automatically pulling them from defeated foes), and once ripe, they will provide fruit and other items that the player can pick up and use, after which the plant withers and disappears.  Food, when eaten, provides experience towards increases in hit points.  Food can also be combined through cooking at the "Pooka Village" cafe and restaurant to make better dishes which grant larger amounts of experience and additional hit point bonuses.  In addition, there are eggs that can be dropped, hatched, and fed seeds to grow chickens that either can be used to gain more eggs, or can be killed to create meat.

==Plot==
thumb|World Map
===Setting===
''Odin Sphere'' is framed as a series of books being read by a little girl named Alice, as she goes through library in her attic (accompanied by her cat, Socrates). Each book is the story of one of the five protagonists.

Ragnanival, the realm of the Demon Lord Odin, has invaded the forested realm of Ringford, home of Elfaria and her fairy subjects. Odin seeks the Crystallization Cauldron, which can create psypher crystals. The battleground for this war is a blasted wasteland between the two countries. This blasted wasteland was once the prosperous nation of Valentine. One day, mysterious disaster devastated Valentine. All that remains of Valentine are the Pookas, cursed humans in the shape of anthropomorphic rabbits, their currency, and the magically-endowed children of the late King Valentine.

Cautiously neutral in this conflict between Ragnanival and Ringford are the city-state of Titania, under the rule of a doddering old king, and the volcanic nation of Volkenon, ruled by Volcano King Onyx. Behind the scenes plot the Three Wise Men, a circle of deceitful wizards, and Queen Odette of Endelphia, who patrols her netherworld home for interlopers.

===Story===

;Gwendolyn
The protaganist of the first story, ''The Valkyrie'', is the valkyrie Gwendolyn (voiced by Mia Bradly in English and Ayako Kawasumi in Japanese), the younger daughter of the Demon Lord Odin. When her elder sister Griselda is killed in battle, she inherits her sister's crystal-headed Psypher spear. Gwendolyn ends up caught up in her father's plot to gain control of the Crystallization Cauldron, and is sent away, to trick the fairies and their agent, the Shadow Knight Oswald. She ends up trapped between her commitment to bring the ring that controls the cauldron to her father and her feelings for Oswald, symbolized by that same ring. The story concludes with Gwendolyn saving Oswald from the underworld after Queen Odette reclaimed him for an unspecified debt, and Gwendolyn defying her father's demand for the Cauldron ring.

;Cornelius
The following story, ''The Pooka Prince'', is that of Prince Cornelius of Titania (voiced by Yuri Lowenthal in English and Daisuke Namikawa in Japanese). Cornelius is in love with the homeless princess Velvet, a fact of which his father disapproves. En route to rendezvous with Velvet, Cornelius is ambushed, transformed into a Pooka, and banished to the Underworld. There, he encounters a mysterious spirit, who gives him a crystal-bladed Psypher sword, which the spirit describes as his birthright. Along with a helpful damned soul, Cornelius escapes the Underworld, and searches for a way to break his curse. Along the way, he finds that the curse was laid by Velvet's capricious brother Ingway, discovers that his father's advisor is one of the treacherous Three Wise Men, and learns the disgraceful circumstances of his grandfather's death.

;Mercedes
The third story, ''Fairy Land'', is about Princess Mercedes of Ringford (voiced by Jennifer Sekiguchi in English and Mamiko Noto in Japanese). When her mother is killed in battle by the Demon Lord Odin, she inherits a crossbow Psypher with a crystal that fires magical bolts, as well as a nation she is ill-prepared to lead. She must deal with an uprising led by her elder cousin Melvin, rescue one of the only living blacksmiths who can forge Psyphers, then lead her nation in battle against Odin himself.

;Oswald
Shadow Knight Oswald (voiced by Derek Stephen Prince in English and Susumu Chiba in Japanese), orphaned human agent of the Ringford fairies, is the protagonist of the fourth story, The Black Sword. He wields a crystal-tipped Psypher sword, and is renowned as a dragon slayer. He was abandoned at a young age and taken in by the nephew of the fairy queen, Melvin. Oswald lives to serve his adoptive father and carries out the orders and duties assigned to him with reckless abandon wielding his blade with an unrivaled skill known throughout all the kingdoms.

;Velvet
The fifth story, ''Fate'', is that of Princess Velvet (voiced by Michelle Ruff in English and Miyuki Sawashiro in Japanese), one of the two uncursed survivors of the ruined kingdom of Valentine. She wields a Psypher chain with a crystal weight at each end. After the country was destroyed due to an incident with the Crystallization Cauldron (which is revealed to be a relic of their country). She is later revealed to be the illegitimate daughter of Valentine's Princess and Odin, making her Gwendolyn's half-sister. For this, she despises Odin, believing that her mother was seduced by him. Velvet's goal in her story is to piece together the prophecies and prevent Armageddon. She is is in love with Cornelius despite her brother's protests.