{{Infobox animanga character
| name         = Sawada Tsunayoshi (Tsuna)
| series       = Katekyo Hitman REBORN!
| image        = 125px|Tsunayoshi Sawada
| caption      = 
| first        = Manga Chapter 1 <br> ''Katekyo Hitman Reborn'' Episode 1
| last         = 
| voiced by    = Yukari Kokubun
| age          = 15
| born         = October 14th
| death        = A little less than 9 years and 10 months into the future (Alternate Timeline)
| relatives    = Nana Sawada (mother), Iemitsu Sawada (father), Giotto (Deceased, Great-Great-Great Grandfather)
| nationality  = Japanese
| divider      = yes
| aux1         = Namimori Jr. High
| aux1 name    = School
| aux2         = 1st year, 2nd year (later in the series)
| aux2 name    = Grade
| aux3         = Ring Of Sky
| aux3 name    = Vongola Ring
}}
 is a fictional character in the anime and manga series ''Reborn!'' created by Amano Akira.

His nickname 'Tsuna' can also be translated as 'tuna'. His bedroom door has a tunafish with his name on it. A common shorthand of his name used among fans is '27' as in Japanese, 2 sounds like 'tsu' and 7 is pronounced 'nana' hence 'tsu-na'. 27 is also written on the woolen version of Tsuna's gloves and his headphones in chapter 176. 

Interestingly enough Tsuna is, in theory, named after Tokugawa Tsunayoshi, (Only the first name though) Tokugawa Tsunayoshi's father, is named Tokugawa Iemitsu. The same name as Tsuna's father. (Again, only the first name) Akira Amano may have gotten Tsuna's, and his father's names from the Tokugawa family,(Although this is not proven) although only Tsunayoshi and Iemitsu are used in the anime.

==Character outline==
Tsuna is set to become the tenth generation boss of the Vongola crime family.

In school, Tsuna has been given the harsh nickname of "'''No Good Tsuna'''", as he is very clumsy and somewhat of a pushover.

Although he is the tenth generation Vongola boss, Tsuna is unwilling to take part in anything that has to do with the Mafia.  He always denies the fact that he is a future Mafia boss and tries to avoid anyone involved with the Mafia. In the Future arc he states that he would rather destroy the Vongola family than accept its bloody history. Tsuna is often surprised and horrified (for a comedic effect) at Reborn's and other mafiosos' actions.  Later, even though he still wants nothing to do with the Mafia, he is grateful for the friends he has made since meeting Reborn.  He cares a lot for his new 'family' and would put himself in the way of danger in order to protect them.

There have been many parallels that link Tsuna with the first boss and founder of the Vongola family, Giotto.  Both of their personalities are likely to be very similar as it has been shown that they have similar goals and ways of standards.

==History==
Tsuna is a junior-high student and the Vongola Family's mob-boss-in-training. The reason Tsuna was recruited is because he is the great-great-great grandson of the first Vongola boss, who had moved to Japan a long time ago. Also, the other candidates in line for the position of the head of the Vongola Family had died.

Before Reborn finds Tsuna, Tsuna is known as "'''No Good Tsuna'''" for his poor grades, bad luck, and lack of athleticism. When Reborn shoots him with the Vongola Family's Dying Will Bullet (a.k.a. Deathperation Shot), he comes back as a powerful mostly-naked (his boxers somehow survive) warrior with a flame on his forehead and blanked out eyes. However, this will only work if he has some sort of regret at the time Reborn shoots him (e.g. not telling Kyoko Sasagawa that he likes her). After five minutes, he turns back into his normal self, usually embarrassed by the fact that he's out in public with only his boxers on.

Tsuna finds himself thrust into the mob life that is his future and begins to meet not only his friends and future family members but also the challenges that his new life will hold.

==Synopsis==
===Introduction arc===
During the Introduction Arc, also known as the Daily Life Arc, Tsuna first meet's Reborn and learns of his heritage and destiny to become the tenth generation boss of the Vongola crime family.  At first, Tsuna is reluctant and dismissive, but he soon learns that this may help him protect his friends, or, as Reborn calls them, his "family".

Reborn introduces Tsuna to the Dying Will Bullet.  Tsuna also meet's his eventual "family", who are mostly people from school, along with some future allies.  Most of the members in Tsuna's family are introduced quite comically and usually bring Tsuna more frustration than hope and stability.

During the arc Tsuna endures everything from meeting other prominent mafia members, to learning how to swim, to nearly dying countless times.

===Kokuyo Gang arc===
Tsuna was the true target of the Kokuyo gang's advances but did not realize this until Reborn pointed it out.  During the arc Tsuna is hit by the Rebuke Bullet for the first time allowing him to go into Hyper Dying Will Mode as well as being able to use the X-gloves.  Both the Rebuke Bullet and the X-Gloves were created by Leon especially for Tsuna and were part of Reborn's plan to slowly give Tsuna an identity and the ability to use the power Reborn knows Tsuna has.

Rokudo Mukuro had previously tried to beat Tsuna by possessing his friends but with the new power Tsuna had gained from his Vongola blood he rises to the occasion. He fights his possessed friends by keeping his guard up and thereby draining their strength.  He uses his intuition, granted to him by his Vongola blood, to strike his friends down with a single hit, thereby temporarily paralyzing them and removing them from danger.  He leaves them in the capable hands of Reborn in order to finish Mukuro.  Tsuna then proceeds to defeat Mukuro in a brilliant battle that showcases Tsuna's growing strength and the power that he truly possesses as he seemingly completely powers Mukuro.

In the aftermath Tsuna learns of Mukuro's troubled past and the secret behind his amazing abilities.  He also meets the Vendicare (enforcers in the Mafia) who take the gang members away for their eventual punishment.  Tsuna then feels the effects of the Rebuke bullet and falls into a deep sleep to replenish his depleted energy.

===The Varia arc===
During a peaceful visit to the mall, Tsuna encounters Basil, a young operative from the Vongola Family, and receives the half Vongola rings from Dino, since the ones Basil had were fake and used a diversion.  Tsuna is horrified as Reborn tells him about the history of the rings and the battle that will follow.  He returns home to find that his "no good dad" had returned after two years and becomes even more depressed.

Tsuna receives the ring of Sky and is shocked to hear that the other six rings were given out.  Reborn is Tsuna's home tutor for his battle and Basil aids him in surpassing the zero point barrier that only the first Vongola boss could do.

Tsuna was very upset to hear that his friends had been sucked into his conflict with the Varia.  He was especially concerned for Lambo, who is too young and tries to get him out of it by reasoning that he is already part of another mafia family.  Reborn consoles Tsuna and tells him that the Bovino family was honored to have Lambo become part of the Vongola family.  Reborn says that while the ring guardians are usually drawn from within the family it is not uncommon for them to come from outside the family, or the mafia altogether.  Reborn also tells Tsuna that only he and the first boss had such unorthodox families.

Tsuna was scheduled to battle against Xanxus for the right to become the holder of the Ring of the Sky, and therefore be the next Vongola boss. However, during Lambo’s battle against Leviathan, Tsuna was forced to intercede in order to save Lambo. Due to this interference, he forfeited his right as the holder of the Ring of the Sky. However, Xanxus agreed to hand over the rings to Tsuna's family if they took the lead by the end of the scramble for the rings.

Later, Tsuna's family obtains a 4 to 3 lead, however, Xanxus chooses to frame Tsuna for the "assassination" of the 9th, later we find that the 9th survived the attack. Xanxus then chooses to hold one last formal battle, having their family wear a special watch which poisons them, immobilizing them. They are required to retrieve the rings from pedestals and the rings themselves, when scanned by the watches, causes an injection of the antidote. Tsuna worries about his family for the first portion of the match, until he learns that Hibari managed to resist the poison and cure himself, then helping Gokudera retrieve his ring, managed to relieve Tsuna of his worries of his teammates possibly dying.

===Future arc===
====Arriving in the future====
The future arc begins with the mysterious disappearance of Reborn while Tsuna and his "family" celebrate their victory against the Varia and Tsuna officially becoming the tenth Vongola Boss.  Later, Tsuna is unexpectedly transported 9 years and 10 months into the future. Tsuna awakes inside a coffin, belonging to his future self.

He is then met by a future version of Gokudera, who is hovering over his coffin, mourning.  After he apologizes to Tsuna for 'letting him down', he warns Tsuna about Shoichi Irie and tells him to kill him as soon as he gets back to the past.  Unfortunately, as Gokudera is about to reveal why Tsuna was in the coffin, he is replaced with his younger self.  They wander until they meet an older Lal Mirch, who at first tries to kill them, and later, an older Yamamoto.  They bring the two to the secret underground Vongola base that the older Tsuna had built. Here, Tsuna's fear is confirmed as he is told that in this timeline, he is indeed dead.  In later chapters it is revealed that he was viciously gunned down in public.

The fact that Tsuna, Reborn, and Gokudera have yet to return to the past dawns on them, and they are forced to seek a solution.  We also learn that the Vongola family is at war with the Millefiore Family for unknown reasons.  The war has nearly reached its conclusion, as almost all of the Vongola family and their allies have been killed.  Tsuna also learns that his future self destroyed the Vongola rings, supposedly to stop the bloodshed over them, but this is merely a theory.  Apparently, the Millefiore Family has stolen most of the other, lesser Vongola rings to use in their campaign against the family.  Reborn states that the 7 guardians must be assembled immediately.

It is decided that the strongest of the seven guardians, Hibari, should teach Tsuna.  Unfortunately, no one knows where he is, forcing Tsuna, Gokudera, and Yamamoto to leave the base to find him.  On their way, they meet the future I-Pin and Lambo, who are being attacked by two members of the Millefiore family.  Tsuna finds the future Haru and Kyoko in the rubble, but within just a few minutes of finding them, they are replaced by their younger selves.  Tsuna purifies his flame with the Ring of Sky and is somehow able to freeze Tazaru's flame.  Tazaru is quite shaken by this as he repeatedly said that it was impossible, and comments that his opponent reminds him of the renowned 10th boss of the Vongola Family.  Battered and beaten from fighting the two Millefiore mafiosi, Gokudera is able to use his Vongola ring with its box and fight back.  Tsuna reawakens in the base's med center, having passed out soon after his victory.  Tsuna seems to now be fitting into his future role as a Mafia boss better as he takes charge of the situation and demands action of Reborn instead of passively following his advice as he would have done normally.  He sees his future path of getting home as hard, but he refuses to back down from the challenge or the hard work he must put in to achieve it.  He is taking more charge in the family and seems to be slowly fitting into his new role.

====Training====
Hibari later agrees to be Tsuna's home tutor and help to train him for the battle with the Millefiore Family. During their training Tsuna is trapped in Hibari's special spike ball, which is actually a hedgehog.  Inside Tsuna sees visions of the Vongola Family's ancient and bloody history. He hears voices telling him that he must accept their history if he is going to be the next Vongola boss. However, Tsuna states that he would rather destroy the Vongola Family and reject the power he seeks than accept that their bloody history is his future. It is then that all nine of the previous heads of the Vongola Family appear before him. Because of his determination, Vongola I and the others approve of him, after which he breaks free of the spike ball, stunning the others (except, of course, Hibari) and revealing Version V.R. (Vongola Ring) of the X-Gloves.

Breaking free from the spiked ball Tsuna's dying will flame is more powerful then ever. Even though Hibari still beats Tsuna he demonstrates good control of his new power and a much keener mind.  At one point Tsuna attacks Hibari and is beaten severely, however he steal's Hibari's box and attacks, which was his true intention.  This is the second time during their fight that Hibari truly sees Tsuna as a worthy opponent.  It appears that the enormous power Tsuna is capable of is still out of reach.  However, Tsuna now fights with a much more powerful will and is becoming the boss Reborn has envisioned. Lal Mirch then proceeds to put him in an intense training regimen, to prepare him for all that he must do.

When an energy source is detected everyone thinks it could be interference or an enemy, however Tsuna knows that it's Chrome showing the development of his intuition and his bond to his family.  He is worried for Chrome, who takes a turn for the worse shortly after being brought to the base.  This only adds to Tsuna's stress as he contemplates the attack on the Millefiore's base in Japan that he and his family are meant to be part of in only five days time.

This stress has been shown to weigh greatly on Tsuna's shoulders and causes him to lash out and constantly question himself, even making him yell to Lambo and Haru after Lambo bothered Tsuna.  This stress may be only another plot device, as it has in the past, to show Tsuna's true resolve and his worthiness as the tenth boss of the Vongola family.

Chrome's condition continues to get worse and worries Tsuna more and more.  He is calmer once Chrome begins to sustain her illusionary organs under her own abilities, but remains cautious.  During Lal Mirch's outburst he once again shows his true resolve.  He stands by the family and says that they will fight in the upcoming battle.  He is quite forceful in his words and points out that while they will return to the past with a victory, the  future will also reset to what it should be.  During his speech he puts on his ring, gloves, and takes a pill to achieve his dying will flame and begins his training once again for the battle in 5 days.

Tsuna continues his training with Hibari.  Despite his vast improvements, he is still too weak.  He has no physical attacks and no boxes to use as weapons.  Lal Mirch is a little worried and explains Tsuna's strength.  When Tsuna used his X-Gloves, they provide a 'soft' flame, which is best for hovering and easier to control.  Now his Vongola Ring Version gloves can provide him with a 'hard' flame in addition to his 'soft' flame.  The 'hard' flame is substantially more powerful and should be used when quick acceleration is needed or simply for raw power.  Tsuna has began to fight trying to use both through the use of his 'hyper intuition', although Lal Mirch brushes that off as she doesn't believe in it.

Tsuna realizes that he is still not powerful enough and Hibari hints that he must use his weapon if he wants to win.  Tsuna takes a small break and ends up apologizing to Lambo and Haru.  Haru even asks him on a date when they return to the past.  During their conversation, Tsuna realizes something about his flame.  He takes into account that XANXUS had the ability to use his flame in different ways and returns to the training room.  He wants to fire his 'hard' flame as a projectile weapon, but the overwhelming power prevents it.  He resolves this by using his 'soft' flame as a 'support' for himself as he fires his 'hard' flame as a weapon.  His first attempt leaves an impression of himself in the wall.  When Reborn checks on him he is proud of Tsuna as usually Tsuna said he couldn't do things even before trying, however this time he answered maybe when asked if he could master his new technique.  His new attack exhausts him and he falls asleep where he dreams alongside Chrome about Irie Souchie.  Once awake he looks for the others to see how their training is progressing.  He comes onto a level he has never been on before and is surprised by an explosion from Gokudera's training.

'''沢田綱吉'''（さわだ つなよし）は、週刊少年ジャンプ連載の漫画作品『家庭教師ヒットマンREBORN!』に登場する架空の人物。アニメ版での声は國分優香里。

== 人物 ==

通称「'''ツナ'''」。家光と奈々を両親に持つ生粋の日本人（しかし、曽曽曽祖父である初代ボンゴレがイタリア人である）。14歳（中学2年生）時点で、身長157cm、体重46.5kg。勉強も運動も苦手で何をやらせても冴えないため、周囲からは「'''ダメツナ'''」と呼ばれている。並盛中に通う中学2年生（ロンシャン編（アニメでは黒曜編直後）までは中学1年生）。好きなゲームは音楽ゲー、落ちゲー。好きな音楽は歌謡曲。子供の頃の夢は巨大ロボになること。将来の夢は京子との結婚。非常識な出来事を受け入れてしまう人物が多い作中において、数少ないツッコミキャラである。ジャンプ誌上の人気投票では、第1回2位→第2回1位（人気キャラ部門）→第3回2位（男性部門）。

なお、本編では1人っ子だが、本編開始前に『週刊少年ジャンプ』に掲載された読みきり版では姉が居るという設定になっている。

=== 性格 ===
何かにつけて気弱で逃げ腰、諦めがちであったが、話の進行につれて次第と正義感や勇気を持つ性格に成長していく。元来争いを好まない性格であり、超死ぬ気モードでは普段とは打って変わって冷静沈着な言動が目立つが、それでも戦闘中ですら非情になることはなく、相手に対し同情することもある。その優しい性格は、穏健派と言われる9代目ですら「マフィアのボスにはあまりにも不向き」と言わしめるほどである。

=== 交友関係 ===
同じ並盛中に通う笹川京子に対し好意を抱いているが、三浦ハルから一方的に思いを寄せられている。面倒見が良く、居候であるランボやイーピン、フゥ太とは本当の兄弟のような関係を築いている。

獄寺隼人からは最初、同い年で日本人のボス候補ということで信用されていなかったが、対決した際に命を救ったことでそれ以降は「10代目」として慕われている。また、笹川了平からは死ぬ気状態のツナに負けて以来、「ボクシングの才能がある」と確信されてしまい、ボクシング部にしつこく入部勧められている。

=== マフィアのボス ===
イタリアンマフィア「'''ボンゴレファミリー'''」初代ボスの末裔で、ファミリーから10代目ボスの次期後継者候補に選ばれ、そのための家庭教師としてアルコバレーノの'''リボーン'''が派遣されている。しかしツナ本人はマフィアになることを頑なに拒んでおり、また赤ん坊に教育されることに困惑しているため当初リボーンを従弟だと紹介していた。

ボンゴレファミリーのボスに必要不可欠な「'''ブラッド・オブ・ボンゴレ'''」を受け継いでおり、「'''超直感'''」という常人を遥かに凌ぐ直感力を持っている。「小言弾」を使用して超死ぬ気の状態となった時に超人的な力を発揮し超直感が研ぎ澄まされるが、死ぬ気状態でなくても超直感を垣間見せることがある。

武器は初代と同じ死ぬ気の炎を灯すことが出来るグローブで、「'''X'''（'''イクス'''）'''グローブ'''」と呼ばれる。ボンゴレリング争奪戦で後継者争いに勝利し、正式にボンゴレファミリーの正統後継者となる。その証として「'''大空のリング'''」を持つ。

== VS黒曜編 ==
並盛中の生徒が黒曜中の生徒に襲われるという事件が起きた後、9代目ボスからの指令によりリボーン、山本武、ビアンキらと事件の首謀者・六道骸のアジトである廃墟「黒曜ヘルシーランド」へ乗り込む。六道骸の影武者・ランチアと対戦し、ランチアの元来の性格を見抜くなど、この頃から常人より優れた直感力を発揮するようになる。

六道骸本人と対峙した後、骸にマインドコントロールされたフゥ太の“望むこと”を直感しマインドコントロールを解く。しかし、この段階での骸自身との戦いでは、獄寺とともに駆けつけた雲雀恭弥に救われる形であった。その直後の憑依弾による骸の非道な手段に怒り、ハイパー死ぬ気モードや研ぎ澄まされた超直感により、骸に憑依された千種と犬を圧倒し、同じく憑依状態にある獄寺とビアンキを身を挺して救うなど見違えるほどの活躍を見せた。最後は骸との激戦の末、人間道のどす黒いオーラを死ぬ気の炎で浄化し、勝利を収める。