'''Hindu College, Colombo''' is a Tamil language  National School situated in the suburb of Colombo- 4.

The school provides Tamil and English-medium education for pupils aged 6 to 19 years in its Primary and Upper sections. In 2006 there are over 4500 students and 120 teachers on the staff. Nearly all the buildings are purpose built and include Science Laboratories, Computer Room, Libraries, and Art facilities.

'''History of the College''' 
''Written by Hindu Web World Team for school website in Feb 2002 with aid from Former Principal D.R. Rajalingam (A/L 2003 Batch). (Following content is copied from school website)''

The dream of several generations of Tamils, particularly the Hindus, living in and around the city of Colombo was fulfilled in 1951. The 12th of February 1951 was a red letter day. On that day was founded the Pillaiyar Padasalai with 48 students and a few volunteer teachers. Mr.Pathamanathan was the first Principal. This was in sequence to the fervent made by a large of the Hindus residing in Colombo. Today this school has blossomed into the formant Tamil Medium National School in the western province. This has been due to the efforts of the founder members and the encouragement, Co-Operation, Assistance and unstrings generosity of parents, old boys and well wishers. 

The initial task of the founders was to find money to launch the school project and their target was to collect one million rupees. A Pamphlet, 10,000 copies in English and 5,000 copies in Tamil was published on the 20th February 1951. 

"We have thought it proper to call upon ourselves - 24 founder members of The Hindu Educational Society- to make the initial sacrifice in this great cause. We felt that we could not be justified in appealing to the public for contributions without first providing tangible proof of our own earnestness to make this big venture a success. Some of the 24 members cannot contribute much, but still we have put up one hundred thousand rupees, the money required immediately for the establishment of the primary school". 

In the month of March 1951 The Pillaiyar Padasalai was shifted to the present premises. Mr.T.Sathasivam was the first head master of the school. 

The school started in a small in a humble building and as the number of students increased over the years, more and more buildings were put up to accommodate them. 

In January 1953, classes up to the senior were commenced. But On the 1st of January 1955 Classes above the fifth grade were transferred to the then newly established Hindu College at Ratmalana. The primary school continued to function at Bambalapitiya. There was however only one Principal for the two institutions. 

Mr.N.Satyendra was appointed principal on the 1st of January 1957. Thereafter Mr.T.Subramaniam was appointed principal on the 1st January 1959. Both schools (Hindu College at Bambalapitiya) came under the control of the Education Ministry. Then Mr.S.Ambalavanar was appointed principal. 

Soon after the take-over, parents of the students of the Bambalapitiya School insisted that it should function independently of the Ratmalana School and that it should also conduct classes up to the senior grade. 

Former senator Mr.T.Neethirajah laid the foundation stone for the first three storey block of class room on the 3rd of March 1966. The block was completed within a short period and there after, the expansion of the school gathered momentum to meet the first growing needs of the Hindu Tamil community. 

Mr.P.Nalliah was appointed principal on 01.01.1967 and the school was upgraded and named "Hindu Junior School". At the same time, it started to function, independently of Hindu College, Ratmalana. Mr.I.M.R.A.Iriyagolle, the Hon. Minister of Education declared open a new three storey block of class rooms. 

The students of the school were divided in four houses with a view to promote a healthy spirit of competitiveness amongst the students. Being a Tamil Hindu School the "Houses" were named after four famous Tamil figures- Valluvar, Kambar, Elango and Bharathi. The colours assigned to the "Houses" were Blue, Green, Yellow and Red respectively. 

These "Houses" brought out the talents and competitive spirit of the students in sports, aesthetics and academic activities. The first inter-house sports-meet was held in 1968. In 1969 the college band formed and it is being actively used at various functions and events related to the school. On 28th March 1969 the first Prize-Giving of the Hindu Junior School was held with the Hon. Prime Minister Mr. Dudley Senanayake as the Chief Guest. 

'''கொழும்பு இந்துக் கல்லூரி''' அல்லது '''பம்பலப்பிட்டி இந்துக் கல்லூரி''' என்றழைக்கப்படும் இக்கல்லூரியானது கல்வியில் முன்னணிவகிக்கும் ஆங்கில (அண்மையில்) மொழியூடாகக் கற்கைகளை மேற்கொள்ளக் கூடிய வசதிகள் உண்டு. தனியாக ஒரு கணினி ஆய்வுகூடமும், நூலகம், விஞ்ஞான ஆய்வுகூடம் போன்ற வசதிகள் உண்டு. 2006ஆம் ஆண்டின் படி 4, 500 மாணவர்களும் 120 ஆசிரியர்களும் இப்பாடசாலையில் பணியில் உள்ளனர். 

==வெளியிணைப்புக்கள்==
*[http://www.colombohindu.com/ கொழும்பு இந்துக் கல்லூரி] 