:''Se Roy Rogers (gitarist) for den amerikanske slidegitaristen.''
thumb|250px|Roy Rogers og [[Dale Evans]]
'''Roy Rogers''' (født '''Leonard Franklin Slye''' amerikansk Western-skuespiller.Han og hans tredje kone Dale Evans, hesten Trigger og hunden Bullet medvirket i over hundre filmer og i  "The Roy Rogers Show". Han kom til California i 1929 der jobbet han som lastebilsjåfør og ferskenplukker inntil han etter hvert fikk småjobber som syngende cowboy. Han hadde små roller i film fra 1935 og fikk sitt gjennombrudd 1938 i «Under Western Stars».

Elton John har tilegnet Roy Rogers og Trigger en sang i sitt album Goodbye Yellow Brick Road fra 1973. 

== Familie ==
Arline Wilkins, hans andre kone, døde noen dager etter fødselen av deres sønn, Roy Rogers Jr. (Dusty). Dale Evans ble hans barns "mor" da Dustu bare var 15 måneder gammel. Han og Arline hadde tre barn, to jenter og Dusty. Roy og Dale adopterte senere 4 barn sammen.

=== Ekteskap ===
* '''Lucile Ascolese''' (8. mai 1933 til deres skilsmisse 8. juni 1936)
* '''Arline Wilkins''' 	(14. juni 1936 til hennes død 3. november 1946)
* '''Dale Evans''' (31. desember 1947 til hans død 6. juli 1998)

== Utmerkelser ==
thumb|200px|Hollywood Walk of Fame
Han har tre stjerner på Hollywood Walk of Fame, den første på 1752 Vine Street for sine bidrag til filmindustrien, den andre på 1733 Vine Street for sine bidrag på radio og den tredje på 1620 Vine Street for sine bidrag på TV.

== Trigger ==
Roy Rogers hest ”Trigger” var nesten like kjent som han selv, Rogers fikk hesten i 1938 og red han i alle sine filmer og TV-show. Trigger døde i 1965, 33 år gammel. Før han overtok Trigger så hadde den medvirket i en film allerede. I 1938 red Olivia de Havilland han i "The Adventures of Robin Hood".

Triggers opprinnelige navn var '''Golden Cloud'''.

{{Infobox actor
| name = Roy Rogers
| image = Roy Rogers and Dale Evans at the 61st Academy Awards.jpg
| imagesize = 300px
| caption = Roy Rogers and Dale Evans at the 61st Academy Awards in 1989.
| birthname = Leonard Franklin Slye
| birthdate = 
| birthplace = Cincinnati, Ohio
| deathdate = 
| deathplace = Apple Valley, California
| spouse = Lucile Ascolese (m.1933)<br>Arline Wilkins (1936-1946)<br>Dale Evans (1947-1998)
| yearsactive = 1935 - 1998
| occupation = actor, singer
}}

'''Leonard Franklin Slye''' (Trigger, and his German Shepherd Dog, Bullet, were featured in over one hundred movies and ''The Roy Rogers Show''. The show ran on radio for nine years before moving to television from 1951 through 1957. His productions usually featured two sidekicks, Pat Brady, (who drove a jeep called "Nellybelle"), and the crotchety Gabby Hayes. Roy's nickname was '''"King of the Cowboys"'''. Dale's nickname was "Queen of the West."  For many Americans (and non-Americans), he was the embodiment of the all-American hero.

==Early life==
thumb|left|250px|''Roy Rogers on Floodwall Mural painted by Robert Dafford, LaFayette, LA as part of a series of murals at his hometown, Portsmouth, Ohio''
Rogers was born to Andrew ("Andy") and Mattie (Womack) Slye in Cincinnati, Ohio, where his family lived in a tenement building on 2nd Street. (Riverfront Stadium was constructed at this location in 1970 and Rogers would later joke that he had been born at second base.) Dissatisfied with his job and city life, Andy Slye and his brother Will built a 12-by-50-foot houseboat from salvage lumber and in July 1912 the Slye family floated up the Ohio River towards Portsmouth, Ohio. Desiring a more stable existence in Portsmouth, Rogers' parents purchased land on which to build a home, but the flood of 1913 allowed them to move the houseboat to their property and continue living in it on dry land.

In 1919 the Slyes purchased a farm about twelve miles north of Portsmouth at Duck Run near Lucasville, Ohio. They there built a six-room home. Rogers' father soon realized that the farm alone would provide insufficient income for his family and he took a job at a shoe factory in Portsmouth, living there during the week and returning home on the weekends, bearing gifts for the family following paydays, one of which was a horse on which Rogers learned his horsemanship.

After completing the eighth grade, Rogers attended high school at Cincinnati, where his father began work at a shoe factory. Rogers soon decided on the necessity to help his family financially, so he quit high school, joined his father at the shoe factory, and began attending night school. After being ridiculed for falling asleep in class, however, he quit school and never returned.

Rogers and his father felt imprisoned by their factory jobs. In 1929 Rogers' older sister Mary was living at Lawndale, California with her husband. Father and son decided to quit their shoe factory jobs. The family packed their 1923 Dodge for a visit with Mary and stayed four months before returning to Ohio. Almost immediately, Rogers had the opportunity to travel to California with Mary's father-in-law, and the rest of the family followed in the spring of 1930.

The Slyes rented a small house near Mary. Rogers and his father immediately found employment as truck drivers for a highway construction project. They reported to work one morning, however, to learn their employer had gone bankrupt. The economic hardship of the Los Angeles and asked Rogers to join him in applying there for work. Rogers, having seen the joy that his guitar and singing had brought to the destitute around the campfires, hesitantly told his father that he was going to pursue a living in music. With his father's blessing, he and cousin Stanley Slye went to Los Angeles and sought musical engagements as The Slye Brothers.

In 1933, Roy married Lucile Ascolese, but they were divorced just three years later. Various World-Wide Web sources report that Leonard and Lucille were married only 2 months.  Some say the marriage ended in divorce.  Others say it was annulled.  Most sites do not mention children. It is unlikely that they had any children together.

==Career==
right|350px|thumb|Publicity photo of [[Gabby Hayes and Roy Rogers from the early 1940s.]]
Rogers moved to California at eighteen to become a singer. After four years of little success, he formed western cowboy music group, in 1934. The group hit it big with songs like "Cool Water" and "Tumbling Tumbleweeds". 

From his first film appearance in 1935, he worked steadily in western films, including a large supporting role as a singing cowboy while still billed as "Leonard Slye" in a Gene Autry movie. In 1938 when Autry temporarily walked out on his movie contract, Slye was immediately rechristened "Roy Rogers"<ref name=Rogers>Leonard Slye's stage name was suggested by Republic Picture's staff after Will Rogers and the shortening of Leroy.</ref> and assigned the lead in ''Under Western Stars''. Rogers became a matinee idol and American legend. A competitor for Gene Autry was suddenly born. In addition to his own movies, Rogers played a supporting role in the John Wayne classic ''Dark Command'' (1940), a harrowing fictionalization of Quantrill's Raiders directed by Raoul Walsh, who had discovered Wayne in 1929 and changed ''his'' name while casting him in ''The Big Trail'', Wayne's first leading role. Rogers became a major box office attraction, and Dale Evans was cast in a movie with him in 1945. The next year, Roy's wife, Arline, died of a massive brain embolism from a bloodclot following the birth of Roy Rogers, Jr. (called Dusty).

Roy and Dale fell in love, and Roy proposed to her during a rodeo at Chicago Stadium. They married on New Years Eve in 1947 at the Flying L Ranch in Davis, Oklahoma where a few months earlier they had filmed Home In Oklahoma. 

It was Dale's fourth marriage. Roy and Dale lived together until his death. 
<!-- Deleted image removed: thumb|left|275px|Original film poster -->
Rogers was an idol for many children through his films and television show. Most of his films were in color in an era when almost all other B-movies were black and white. There were Roy Rogers action figures, cowboy adventure novels, a comic strip, and a variety of marketing successes. Some of his movies would segue into animal adventures, in which Roy's horse Trigger would go off on his own for a while with the camera following him.

The Sons of the Pioneers continued their popularity through the 1950s. Although Rogers was no longer a member, they often appeared as Rogers' backup group in films and on TV.  

Rogers and his second wife, Arlene (Wilkins) had three children: an adopted daughter, Cheryl, and two biological children, Linda Lou and Roy Jr.  Dale and Roy had a daughter, Robin Elizabeth, who died of complications of Down Syndrome at age two. Evans wrote about losing their daughter in her book ''Angel Unawares''.

Rogers and Evans were also well known as advocates for adoption and as founders and operators of children's charities. They adopted several children. Both were outspoken Christians. In Apple Valley, California, where they made their home, numerous streets and highways as well as civic buildings have been named after them in recognition of their efforts on behalf of homeless and handicapped children. Roy was an active Freemason and a Shriner and was noted for his support of their charities.

Roy and Dale's famous theme song, which Dale wrote and they sang as a duet to sign off their television show, was "Happy trails to you, Until we meet again...". 