right|thumb|250px|In this 1953 portrait, the artist [[Jon Whitcomb captured the essence of Arthur Godfrey's appeal to radio and television audiences. Combining both the musical instrument and color (red) identified with Godfrey, Whitcomb used the ukulele to create a diagonal design with an additional vignette effect forcing a focus on the entertainer's face.]]
'''Arthur Morton Leo Godfrey''' (American radio and television broadcaster and entertainer who was sometimes introduced by his nickname, '''The Old Redhead'''. He was strongly identified with one of his sponsors, Lipton Tea.<ref>[http://graphic-design.tjs-labs.com/gallery-view?keyword=ARTHUR%20GODFREY Gallery of classic graphic design featuring Arthur Godfrey acting as spokesman for various products including Lipton]</ref>

==Early years==
Godfrey was born in New York City in 1903.<ref name=time1/> His mother, Kathryn Morton Godfrey, was from a well-to-do New York family which disapproved of her marriage to an older Englishman, Arthur Hanbury Godfrey. The senior Godfrey was a sportswriter and considered an expert on surrey and hackney horses, but the advent of the automobile devastated the family's finances. By 1915, when Arthur was 12, the family had moved to Hasbrouck Heights, New Jersey.<ref>Emblen, Frank. [http://select.nytimes.com/search/restricted/article?res=F50E13F93C5C0C7B8DDDAB0994DB484D81 "New Jersey Guide"], ''The New York Times'', December 18, 1983. Accessed November 7, 2007. "Mr. Godfrey, who died on March 16 at the age of 79, was a native of Hasbrouck Heights."</ref> Arthur, the eldest of five children, tried to help them survive by working before and after school, but at age 14 left home to ease the financial burden on the family. By 15 he was a civilian typist at Camp Merritt, New Jersey and enlisted in the Navy (by lying about his age) two years later. 

Godfrey's father was something of a "free thinker" by the standards of the era.  He didn't disdain organized religion but insisted his children explore all faiths before deciding for themselves which to embrace. Their childhood friends included Catholic, Jewish and every flavor of Protestant playmates. The senior Godfrey was friends with the Vanderbilts, but was as likely to spend his time talking with the shoeshine man or the hotdog vendor about issues of the day.  In the book, "Genius in the Family" (G.P. Putnam's Sons, New York, 1962), written about their mother by Godfrey's youngest sister, Dorothy Gene with the help of their sister, Kathy, it was reported the angriest they ever saw their father was when a man on the ferry declared the Ku Klux Klan a civic organization vital to the good of the community. They rode the ferry back and forth three times, with their father arguing with the man that the Klan was a bunch of "Blasted, bigoted fools, led 'round by the nose!"

Godfrey's mother, Kathryn, was a gifted artist and composer whose aspirations to fame were laid aside to take care of her family after her husband, Arthur or "Darl'", died.  Her creativity enabled the family to get through some very hard times by playing the piano to accompany silent movies, making jams and jellies and crocheting bedspreads to sell, and even cutting off and selling her floor length hair, as it was extremely difficult for a woman of her "class" to find work without violating social mores of the time.  The one household item that was never sold or turned into firewood was the piano, and she believed at least some of her children would succeed in show business.  In her later years some of her compositions were performed by symphony orchestras in Canada, which earned her a mention in ''Time''.<ref></ref> In 1957, at the age of 78, her sauciness made her a big hit with the audience when she appeared on Groucho Marx's quiz show ''You Bet Your Life''.  She died of cancer in 1968 at a nursing home in a suburb north of Chicago.

Godfrey served in the Coast Guard from 1927 to 1930. It was during a Coast Guard stint in Baltimore that he appeared on a local talent show and became popular enough to land his own brief weekly program.

==Radio==
right|thumb|450px|In this CBS publicity photo of ''Arthur Godfrey Time'', vocalist Patti Clayton is seen at the far right and Godfrey sits in the foreground. Clayton, the original 1944 voice of [[Chiquita Brands International|Chiquita Banana, was married to Godfrey's director, Saul Ochs.]]
On leaving the Coast Guard, Godfrey became a radio announcer for the Baltimore station WFBR and moved the short distance to Washington, D.C. to become a staff announcer for NBC-owned station WRC the same year and remained there until 1934. He was already an avid flyer. In 1933, Godfrey nearly died following a violent car crash outside Washington that left him hospitalized for months.  During that time, he decided to listen closely to the radio and realized that the stiff, formal announcers could not connect with the average radio listener, as the announcers spoke in stentorian tones, as if giving a formal speech to a crowd and not communicating on a personal level. Godfrey vowed that when he returned to the airwaves he would effect a relaxed, informal style as if he were talking to just one person. He also used that style to do his own commercials and became a regional star.

In addition to announcing, Godfrey sang and played the ukulele. In 1934 he became a freelance entertainer, but eventually based himself on a daily show titled ''Sundial'' on CBS-owned station WJSV (now WTOP) in Washington. Godfrey was the station's morning disc jockey, playing records, delivering commercials (often with tongue in cheek), interviewing guests, and even reading news reports during his three-hour shift. Godfrey loved to sing, and would frequently sing random verses during the "talk" portions of his program. One surviving broadcast from 1939 has Godfrey unexpectedly turning on his microphone to harmonize with The Foursome's recording of "There'll Be Some Changes Made." 

He knew President WABC (now WCBS), and was heard on both WJSV and WABC for a time. In the autumn of 1942, he also became the announcer for Fred Allen's ''Texaco Star Theater'' show on the CBS network, but a personality conflict between Allen and Godfrey led to his early release from the show after only six weeks.

Godfrey became nationally known in April 1945 when, as CBS's morning-radio man in Washington, he took the microphone for a live, firsthand account of President Roosevelt's funeral procession. The entire CBS network picked up the broadcast, later preserved in the Edward R. Murrow and Fred W. Friendly record series, ''I Can Hear it Now.'' Unlike the tight-lipped news reporters and commentators of the day, who delivered breaking stories in an earnest, businesslike manner, Arthur Godfrey's tone was sympathetic and neighborly, lending immediacy and intimacy to his words. When describing new President Harry S. Truman's car in the procession, Godfrey fervently said, in a choked voice, "God bless him, President Truman." Godfrey broke down in tears and cued the listeners back to the studio. The entire nation was moved by his emotional outburst. 

Godfrey made such an impression on the air that CBS gave him his own morning time slot on the nationwide network. ''Arthur Godfrey Time'' was a Monday-Friday show that featured his monologues, interviews with various stars, music from his own in-house combo and regular vocalists. Godfrey's monologues and discussions were unscripted, and went wherever he chose. 

In 1947, Godfrey had a surprise hit record with the novelty "Too Fat Polka (She's Too Fat For Me)" written by Ross MacLean and Arthur Richardson.  The song's popularity led to the Andrews Sisters recording a version adapted to the women's point-of-view.   

Godfrey's morning show was supplemented by a primetime variety show, ''Arthur Godfrey's Talent Scouts''. This variety show, a showcase for rising young performers, was a slight variation of CBS's successful ''Original Amateur Hour''. Some of the performers had made public appearances in their home towns and were recommended to Godfrey by friends or colleagues. These "sponsors" would accompany the performers to the broadcast and introduce them to Godfrey on the air. Two acts from the same 1948 broadcast were Wally Cox and The Chordettes. Both were big hits that night, and both were signed to recording contracts. Godfrey took special interest in The Chordettes, who sang his kind of barbershop-quartet harmony, and he soon made them part of his broadcasting and recording "family."

Performers who appeared on ''Talent Scouts'' included Sonny Till & The Orioles. Following his appearances on the ''Louisiana Hayride'', Presley traveled to New York for an unsuccessful ''Talent Scouts'' audition in April 1955; after the ''Talent Scouts'' staff rejected The Orioles, they went on to have a hit record with "Crying in the Chapel" and kicked off the "bird group" trend of early rock 'n' roll.  

Godfrey also was an avid amateur radio operator, with the station call sign K4LIB.He is a member of the National Association of Broadcasters Hall of Fame in the radio division.<ref></ref>

==Television==
In 1948, ''Arthur Godfrey Time'' began to be simultaneously broadcast on radio and Pillsbury cake mixes and Chesterfield cigarettes.  

He found that one way to enhance his pitches was to extemporize his commercials, poking fun at the sponsors (while never showing disrespect for the products themselves), the sponsors' company executives, and advertising agency types who wrote the scripted commercials that he regularly ignored. (If he read them at all, he ridiculed them.) To the surprise of the advertising agencies and sponsors, Godfrey's kidding of the commercials and products frequently enhanced the sales of those products. His popularity and ability to sell brought a windfall to CBS, accounting for a significant percentage of their corporate profits.

In 1949 ''Arthur Godfrey and His Friends'', a weekly variety show, began on CBS-TV in prime time. His affable personality combined warmth, heart, and occasional bits of ''double entendre'' repartee. They earned Godfrey adulation from fans who felt that despite his considerable wealth, he was really "one of them," his personality that of a friendly next-door-neighbor. His ability to sell products, insisting he would not promote any in which he did not personally believe, gave him a level of trust from his audience, a belief that "if Godfrey said it, it must be so." When he quit smoking after his 1953 hip surgery, he spoke out against smoking on the air and merely shrugged off Chesterfield's departure as a regular sponsor as he knew that other sponsors would easily fill the vacancy.

Eventually Godfrey added a weekend "best of" program culled from the week's ''Arthur Godfrey Time'', known as ''Arthur Godfrey Digest''. He began to veer away from interviewing stars in favor of a small group of regular performers that became known as the "Little Godfreys." Many of these artists were relatively obscure, but were given colossal national exposure, some of them former ''Talent Scouts'' winners including Hawaiian vocalist Haleloke, veteran Irish tenor Frank Parker, Marian Marlowe and Julius LaRosa, who was in the Navy when Godfrey, doing his annual Naval reserve duty, discovered the young singer and offered him a job upon his discharge. 

LaRosa joined the cast in 1951 and became a favorite with Godfrey's immense audience, who also saw him on the prime-time weekly show ''Arthur Godfrey and his Friends''. Godfrey also had a regular announcer-foil on the show: Tony Marvin. Godfrey preferred his performers not to use personal managers or agents, but often had his staff represent the artists if they were doing personal appearances. 

Godfrey was one of the busiest men in the entertainment industry, often presiding over several daytime and evening radio and TV shows simultaneously. (Even busier was Robert Q. Lewis, who hosted ''Arthur Godfrey Time'' whenever Godfrey was absent, adding to his own crowded schedule.) Both Godfrey and Lewis made commercial recordings for Columbia Records, often featuring the "Little Godfreys" in various combinations. In 1951 Godfrey also narrated a nostalgic movie documentary, ''Fifty Years Before Your Eyes'', produced for Warner Brothers by silent-film anthologist Robert Youngson.

On a memorable evening in 1953, disc jockey Steve Allen was a last-minute replacement for Godfrey on ''Talent Scouts''. When it came time to deliver the live commercial for Lipton tea and soups, Allen impulsively prepared the soup ''and'' the tea on camera, and poured both into a ukulele. Shaking the mixture well, he played a few damp notes while reciting the rest of the commercial, to the delight of the studio audience, the viewers, and Godfrey himself. Allen became a national celebrity and within the year he would become the first host of NBC's ''Tonight'' show.

In his own way, Godfrey was a social pioneer. One of the "Little Godfrey" acts were the Mariners, an integrated vocal quartet of white and black Coast Guard veterans. When the act appeared on his TV show, Southern CBS affiliates and racist Southern politicians complained of their participating in dance sequences with white women. Godfrey responded caustically, decrying the racism and refusing to remove them from the cast.  

Godfrey's immense popularity and the trust placed in him by audiences was noticed not just by advertisers but by his friend U.S. President nuclear war. It was thought that viewers would be reassured by Godfrey's grandfatherly tone and folksy manner. The existence of the PSA tapes was confirmed in Dr. Frank Stanton in an exchange with a writer with the Web site CONELRAD.

==Aviation==
350px|thumb|Godfrey (left) with [[National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics|NACA pilot George Cooper and Ames Director Smith DeFrance]]

Godfrey learned to fly in the 1930s while doing radio in the Washington, D.C. area, starting out with gliders, then learning to fly airplanes. He was badly injured on his way to a flying lesson one afternoon in 1931 when a truck, coming the other way, lost its left front wheel and hit him head on.  Godfrey spent months recuperating, and the injury would keep him from flying on active duty during WWII. He served as a reserve officer in the U.S. Navy in a public affairs role during the war. 

Godfrey used his pervasive fame to advocate a strong anti-Communist stance and to pitch for enhanced strategic air power in the Cold War atmosphere. In addition to his advocacy for civil rights, he became a strong promoter of his middle-class fans vacationing in Hawaii and Miami Beach, Florida, formerly enclaves for the wealthy. He made a TV movie in 1953 taking the controls of an Eastern Airlines Lockheed Constellation airliner and flying to Miami, thus showing how safe airline travel had become. As a reserve officer, he used his public position to cajole the Navy into qualifying him as a Naval Aviator, and played that against the Air Force, who successfully recruited him into their reserve. At one time during the 1950s, Godfrey had flown every active aircraft in the military inventory at one time or another.

His continued unpaid shilling for Eastern Airlines earned him the undying gratitude of good friend Eddie Rickenbacker, the WWI flying ace who was the President of the airline. He was such a good friend of the airline that Rickenbacker took a retiring DC-3, fitted it out with an executive interior and DC-4 engines, and presented it to Godfrey, who then used it to commute to the studios in New York City from his huge Leesburg, Virginia farm every Sunday night. Such a ''quid pro quo'' would nowadays bring charges of conflict of interest, but in the context of the early 1950s, nothing was said.

The new DC-3 was so powerful (and noisy) that the Town of Leesburg ended up moving its airport. The original Leesburg airport, which Godfrey owned and referred to affectionately as "The Old Cow Pasture" on his show, was less than a mile from the center of town, and residents had come to expect rattling windows and crashing dishes every Sunday evening and Friday afternoon.  

In 1960, Godfrey proposed building a new airport by selling the old field, and donating a portion of the sale to a local group. Since Godfrey funded the majority of the airport, it is now known as Navion, a smaller single-engined airplane, as well as a Lockheed Jetstar, and in later years a Beech Baron and a Beech Duke, registration number N1M. 

In January 1954, Godfrey buzzed the control tower of Teterboro Airport in his Douglas DC-3. His license was suspended for six months. Godfrey claimed the windy conditions that day required him to turn immediately after takeoff, but in fact he was peeved with the tower because they wouldn't give him the runway he asked for. A similar event occurred while he flew near Chicago in 1956, though no sanctions were imposed. These incidents, in the wake of the controversies that swirled around Godfrey after his firing of Julius LaRosa, only further underscored the differences between his private and public persona.

'''Arthur Morton Godfrey''' (* Moderator, sowie Sänger und Filmschauspieler.

== Leben ==
Godfrey wuchs in New York auf. Nach ein paar Jahren bei der Marine und später der Küstenwache trat er Ende der 1920er Jahre in NBC zu arbeiten und zog nach Washington (D.C.). Durch seine Art die Zuhörer als einzelne Personen anzusprechen, anstatt als Menge, wurde er schon bald ein regionaler Star. Zudem moderierter er nicht nur, sondern sang zusätzlich noch und spielte Ukulele.

1934 wechselte Godfrey seinen Arbeitsplatz und arbeitete nun für CBS, wo er täglich seine eigene Show ''Arthur Godfrey's Sun Dial'' moderierte. In den '40er Jahren war er dann an verschiedenen Sendungen von CBS beteiligt und arbeitete im Zweiten Weltkrieg, aufgrund einer Bekanntschaft mit Franklin D. Roosevelt, bei den U.S. Navy Reserves. Ende des Jahrzehnts leitete er dann die Radio-Sendung ''Arthur Godfrey Time'', die 1948 zusätzlich im Fernsehen zu laufen begann. Sie beinhaltete Interviews mit Stars und Auftritte verschiedener bekannter Sänger.

Von 1948 bis 1958 moderierte Godfrey dann ''Arthur Godfrey's Talent Scouts'', eine Sendung, in der verschiedene vielversprechende Sängerinnen und Sänger auftraten, von denen viele später auch Berühmtheit erlangten. Im nächsten Jahr kam mit ''Arthur Godfrey and His Friends'' eine ähnliche Show hinzu. Anfang der 1950er Jahre erreichten diese Sendungen die Spitze ihres Erfolges, ab Mitte des Jahrzehnts begann dieser dann wieder nachzulassen.

1959 wurde bei Godfrey Lungenkrebs festgestellt, von dem er jedoch wieder geheilt werden konnte. Er setzte seine Arbeit als Moderator von ''Arthur Godfrey Time'' fort, wenn auch nur noch im Radio. Die Sendung sollte erst 1972 aus dem Programm genommen werden. 1983 starb Arthur Godfrey in New York an einem Lungenemphysem.