thumb

'''Lydia Koidula''' (24. joulukuuta 1843 – 11. elokuuta 1886), oikealta nimeltään '''Lydia Emilie Florentine Jannsen''', oli virolainen kirjailija ja Viron kansallisrunoilija. Hän oli lisäksi virolaisen sanomalehtityön uranuurtaja.

Lydia Koidula on ainoana virolaisena naisena päässyt seteliin. Tuon setelin arvo on 100 kruunua.

== Henkilöhistoria ==

Lydia Koidula syntyi Vana-Vändrassa sivistyneistöperheeseen vuonna 1843. Hänen isänsä Johann Voldemar Jannsen oli ammatiltaan opettaja, ja tytärkin sai oppia Pärnun tyttökoulussa. Isä toimitti vuosina 1857–1863 kansallisromanttisesti painottunutta ''Pärnu Postimeestä'', joka oli Viron ensimmäinen sanomalehti, ja tytär avusti häntä. Sanomalehtityössä Koidula oppi käyttämään sujuvasti viroa, vaikka perheen kotikieli oli saksa.

Perhe muutti vuonna 1863 Tarttoon, jossa Jannsen ryhtyi julkaisemaan uutta ''Eesti Postimees'' -lehteä. Koidulan ensimmäiset runot ilmestyivät tässä lehdessä, ja jo vuonna 1866 ilmestyi hänen esikoiskokoelmansa ''Waino-Lilled'' (’Kedon kukkia’). Heti seuraavana vuonna ilmestyi toinen kokoelma ''Emajõe Öpik'' (’Emajoen satakieli’), jonka sisältö oli jo vahvasti isänmaallista. Kirjailijanimeksi vakiintui Lydia Koidula. Kaksi kokoelmaa jäivät Koidulan elämän aikana ainoiksi kokonaisiksi kokoelmiksi, mutta hän julkaisi runojaan lehdissä, kokoelmissa ja muissa julkaisuissa.

thumb|230px|Koidulan kirjoittama teksti [[viron kruunu|sadan kruunun setelissä: ''Silla otsab ühendatud, Kandes ühte isamaad, Tõe templiks pühendatud... Nägu — millal tõeks saad?!'']]

Vuonna Yrjö Koskisen. Matkan jälkeen suhteet Suomeen tosin hiipuivat. Viron poliittiset kiistat masensivat Koidulaa kovasti.

Monta kosintaa torjunut Koidula meni yllättäen naimisiin latvialaisen sotilaslääkärin kanssa vuonna 1873. Avioliitto vei Koidulan Kronstadtiin, jossa hänen aviomiehensä työskenteli. Muutos oli suuri niin kielellisesti kuin kulttuurillisesti. Koidula ei viihtynyt uudessa kotikaupungissaan, ja hänen runoutensa sai melankolisen sävyn. Koidula ei silti lopettanut runoilua, vaan hänen Kronstadtin-aikansa tuotanto on varsin runsas.

Koidulan terveys oli ollut nuoresta asti heikko. Viimeisinä vuosinaan hän sairastui syöpään, joka vei hänet lopulta hautaan Kronstadtissa vuonna 1886. Koidulan merkitys Viron runoudelle oli kuitenkin suuri, ja hänen arvonsa on vain noussut. Pärnussa sijaitsee runoilijalle omistettu Lydia Koidulan museo ja hänen muistopatsaansa. Lydia Koidulan kuva on myös Viron sadan kruunun setelissä.

== Teoksia ==

thumb

'''Lydia Koidula''', (Estonian poet.  Her sobriquet, Lydia Koidula, meaning  ‘Lydia of the Dawn’ in Estonian, was given her by the writer Carl Robert Jakobson. She is also frequently referred to as Koidulaulik – ‘Singer of the Dawn‘. 

==Life==
<!-- Deleted image removed: thumb|right|350px|Lydia Koidula - 100 krones banknote - Republic of Estonia -->
Writing in Estonia, like elsewhere in Europe, was not considered a suitable career for a respectable young lady in the mid-nineteenth-century. Koidula’s poetry and her newspaper work for her populist father, Johann Voldemar Jannsen (1819–1890) remained anonymous.  In spite of this, she was a major literary figure, the founder of Estonian theatre, and closely allied to Carl Robert Jakobson (1841-1882), the influential radical and Friedrich Reinhold Kreutzwald (1803-1882), writer of the Estonian national epic, ''Kalevipoeg'' (''The Son of Kalev''). 

Lydia Jannsen was born in Vändra, Pärnumaa in central Estonia (then a Russian imperial province Livonia). The family moved to the nearby county town of Alexander II (1855-1881) was relatively liberal and Jannsen managed to persuade the imperial censorship to allow him to publish the first national Estonian language newspaper in 1864. Both the Pärnu local and the national newspaper were called ''Postimees'' (''The Courier''). Lydia wrote for her father on both papers besides publishing her own work. In 1873 she married Eduard Michelson, a Latvian army physician, and moved to Kronstadt, the headquarters of the Russian navy near St. Petersburg. In 1876-78 the Michelsons visited Breslau, Strasbourg and Vienna. Koidula lived in Kronstadt for 13 years but despite spending her summers in Estonia, she never stopped feeling inconsolably homesick. Lydia Koidula was the mother of three children. She died on August 11, 1886 after a long and painful illness. Her last poem was ''Enne surma- Eestimaale!'' (''Before Death, To Estonia!'').

==Works==
thumb|left|200px|Lydia Koidula. Same image is used on an [[Estonian kroon|Estonian banknote]]

Koidula’s most important work, ''Emajõe Ööbik'', (''The Nightingale of the Emajõgi [the Mother] River''), was published in 1867. Three years earlier, in 1864, Adam Peterson, a farmer, and Johan Köler, a fashionable Estonian Saint Petersburg portraitist, had petitioned the czar for better treatment from the German landlords who ruled Estonia, equality and for the language of education to be Estonian. Immediately afterwards they were taken to the police where they were interrogated about a petition that ‘included false information and was directed against the regime’. Adam Peterson was sentenced to imprisonment for a year. Two years later, in 1866, the censorship reforms of 1855, that had given Koidula’s father a window to start ''Postimees,'' were reversed. Pre-publication censorship was re-imposed and literary freedom was curtailed. This was the political and literary climate when Koidula started to publish. Nevertheless, it was also the time of the National Awakening when the Estonian people, freed from serfdom in 1816, were beginning to feel a sense of pride in nationhood and to aspire to self-determination. Koidula was the most articulate voice of these aspirations.

German influence in Koidula’s work was unavoidable. The National Awakening in the 1860s, Estonia had been ruled by oppressive foreign powers, Danish, German, Swedish, Polish and Russian for over 600 years. She was, however, no mere victim or wilting plant. Koidula's work is full of passion and pride and she was conscious of her own role in the destiny of the nation – ‘It is a sin, a great sin, to be little in great times when a person can actually make history’ she wrote to a Finnish correspondent. 

The Estonian literary tradition started by Kreutzwald continued with Koidula but whereas ''The Bard of Viru'' tried to imitate the ''regivärss'' folk traditions of ancient Estonian, Koidula wrote (mostly) in modern, Western European end-rhyming metres that had, by the mid 19th century, become the dominant form . This made Koidula’s poetry much more accessible to the popular reader. But the major importance of Koidula lays not so much in her preferred form of verse but in her potent use of the Estonian language. Estonian was, still, in the 1860’s, in a German dominated Baltic province of Imperial Russia, the language of the oppressed indigenous peasantry. It was still the subject of orthographical bickering, still used in the main for predominantly patronising educationalist or religious texts, practical advice to farmers or cheap and cheerful popular story telling. Koidula successfully used this neglected and abused language to express emotions that ranged from an affectionate poem about the family cat, in ''Meie kass'' (''Our Cat'') and delicate love poetry, ''Head ööd'' (''Good Night'') to a powerful ''cri de coeur'' and rallying call to an oppressed nation, ''Mu isamaa nad olid matnud'' (''My Country, they have buried you''). With Lydia Koidula the colonial view that the Estonian language was an underdeveloped instrument for communication was, for the first time, very powerfully contradicted.