'''Paradigma''' este o identităţi de activităţii de cercetare de exemplu) şi astfel pentru rezolvarea unor probleme sau sarcini.

La Thomas Kuhn baza practicii cercetării şi a consensului într-o ştiinţă care a atins stadiul maturităţii nu este teoria ştiinţifică, ci ceva mai complex, paradigma. Kuhn argumentează că cercetarea ştiinţifică în disciplinele care au ajuns în acest stadiu nu este condusă în primul rând de teorii şi reguli metodologice generale, ci de experienţe împărtăşite în comun, ce sunt încastrate în paradigme.

Paradigmele înţelese ca realizări ştiinţifice exemplare, ca exemple concrete de formulări şi soluţii ale problemelor ştiinţifice, sunt baza acelui acord al oamenilor de ştiinţă asupra fundamentelor, ce distinge orice cercetare ştiinţifică matură.
Paradigmele sunt realizări ştiinţifice universal recunoscute care, pentru o perioadă, oferă probleme şi soluţii model unei comunităţi de practicieni.
Ca realizări ştiinţifice care oferă modele de formulare şi rezolvare de probleme unui grup de cercetători, constituie entităţi complexe ce cuprind elemente de natură teoretică, instrumentală şi metodologică. Cunoaşterea cuprinsă într-o paradigmă este în mare măsură una tacită. Formularea şi rezolvarea de probleme pe baza cunoaşterii tacite cuprinse în paradigme constituie ceea ce Kuhn numeşte „ştiinţă normală” sau „cercetare normală”. 

Regulile derivă din paradigme, dar paradigmele pot ghida cercetarea chiar în lipsa regulilor.

Since the late 1960s, the word '''paradigm''' (scientific epistemological context. Initially, the word was specific to grammar: the 1900 ''Merriam-Webster'' dictionary defines its technical use only in the context of grammar or, in rhetoric, as a term for an illustrative parable or fable. 
In linguistics, Ferdinand de Saussure used ''paradigm'' to refer to a class of elements with similarities. The Merriam-Webster Online dictionary defines it as "a philosophical and theoretical framework of a scientific school or discipline within which theories, laws, and generalizations and the experiments performed in support of them are formulated; ''broadly '': a philosophical or theoretical framework of any kind.<ref>[http://www.m-w.com/dictionary/paradigm paradigm - Definition from the Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary<!-- Bot generated title -->]</ref>

==Scientific paradigm==

Historian of science Thomas Kuhn gave this word its contemporary meaning when he adopted it to refer to the set of practices that define a scientific discipline during a particular period of time. Kuhn himself came to prefer the terms exemplar and normal science, which have more exact philosophical meanings. However, in his book ''The Structure of Scientific Revolutions'' Kuhn defines a scientific paradigm as:

*''what'' is to be observed and scrutinized
*the kind of ''questions'' that are supposed to be asked and probed for answers in relation to this subject
*''how'' these questions are to be structured
*''how'' the results of scientific investigations should be interpreted

Alternatively, the ''Oxford English Dictionary'' defines paradigm as "a pattern or model, an exemplar." Thus an additional component of Kuhn's definition of paradigm is:
*''how'' is an experiment to be conducted, and ''what'' equipment is available to conduct the experiment.

Thus, within normal science, the paradigm is the set of exemplary experiments that are likely to be copied or emulated. The prevailing paradigm often represents a more specific way of viewing reality, or limitations on acceptable ''programs'' for future research, than the much more general scientific method. 

An example of a currently accepted paradigm would be the standard model of physics. The scientific method would allow for orthodox scientific investigations of many phenomena which might contradict or disprove the standard model; however grant funding would be more difficult to obtain for such experiments, in proportion to the amount of departure from accepted standard model theory which the experiment would test for.  For example, an experiment to test for the mass of the neutrino or decay of the proton (small departures from the model) would be more likely to receive money than experiments to look for the violation of the conservation of momentum, or ways to engineer reverse time travel. 

One important aspect of Kuhn's paradigms is that the paradigms are  incommensurable, which means that two paradigms can not be compared to each other. A new paradigm which replaces an old paradigm is not necessarily better, because the criteria of judgement depend on the paradigm.

A more disparaging term groupthink, and the term mindset, have very similar meanings that apply to smaller and larger scale examples of disciplined thought.  Michel Foucault used the terms episteme and discourse, mathesis and taxinomia, for aspects of a "paradigm" in Kuhn's original sense.

'''Simple common analogy:''' A simplified analogy for ''paradigm'' is a habit of reasoning or, the box in the commonly used phrase "thinking outside the box". Thinking inside the box is analogous with normal science. The box encompasses the thinking of normal science and thus the box is analogous with ''paradigm.'' "Thinking outside the box" would be what Kuhn calls revolutionary science. Revolutionary science is usually unsuccessful, and only rarely leads to new paradigms. When they are successful they lead to large scale changes in the scientific worldview. 

==Paradigm shifts==

Paradigm shifts tend to be most dramatic in sciences that appear to be stable and mature, as in Lord Kelvin famously stated, "There is nothing new to be discovered in physics now. All that remains is more and more precise measurement." Five years later, Albert Einstein published his paper on special relativity, which challenged the very simple set of rules laid down by Newtonian mechanics, which had been used to describe force and motion for over two hundred years. In this case, the new paradigm reduces the old to a special case in the sense that Newtonian mechanics is still a good model for approximation for speeds that are slow compared to the speed of light. 

Philosophers and historians of science, including Kuhn himself, ultimately accepted a modified version of Kuhn's model, which synthesizes his original view with the gradualist model that preceded it. Kuhn's original model is now generally seen as too limited.

Kuhn himself did not consider the concept of paradigm as appropriate for the social sciences.  He explains in his preface to "The Structure of Scientific Revolutions" that he concocted the concept of paradigm precisely in order to distinguish the social from the natural sciences (p.''x'').  He wrote this book at the Palo Alto Center for Scholars, surrounded by social scientists, when he observed that they were never in agreement on theories or concepts.  He explains that he wrote this book precisely to show that there are no, nor can be, any paradigms in the social sciences.  Mattei Dogan, a French sociologist, in his article "Paradigms in the Social Sciences," develops Kuhn's original thesis that there are no paradigms at all in the social sciences since the concepts are polysemic, the deliberate mutual ignorance between scholars and the proliferation of schools in these disciplines. Dogan provides many examples of the inexistance of paradigms in the social sciences in his essay, particularly in sociology, political science and political anthropology.

In ''The Structure of Scientific Revolutions'', Kuhn wrote that "Successive transition from one paradigm to another via revolution is the usual developmental pattern of mature science." (p.12)

Kuhn's idea was itself revolutionary in its time, as it caused a major change in the way that academics talk about science. Thus, it could be argued that it caused or was itself part of a "paradigm shift" in the history and sociology of science.  However, Kuhn would not recognise such a paradigm shift.  Being in the social sciences, people can still use earlier ideas to discuss the history of science.

===Paradigm Paralysis===

Perhaps the greatest barrier to a paradigm shift, in some cases, is the reality of paradigm paralysis, the inability to see beyond the current models of thinking.<ref>[http://www.mnsu.edu/comdis/kuster/Infostuttering/Paradigmparalysis.html Do you suffer from paradigm paralysis ?]</ref>

Examples include Galileo's theory of a heliocentric universe, the discovery of electrostatic photography, xerography, and the quartz clock.

== Paradigm as the "Gestalt of a Weltanschauung" ==
Another perspective to the concept of what a paradigm is, is that a Paradigm is the Gestalt (organized whole) of the three main branches of philosophy that forms a "Weltanschauung" (German for 'Worldview')

Uses of the concept '''''paradigm''''' in the understanding of Kuhn and others, are mostly unclear and ambiguous analogies — ''ignotum per ignotius'' (the unknown explained by means of the more unknown), or ''obscurum per obscurius'' (the unclear explained by means of the more unclear) — to other concepts like the model.

Kuhn defines a paradigm as: “an entire constellation of beliefs, values and techniques, and so on, shared by the members of a given community”(Kuhn). This definition by Kuhn appears in the 1969 postscript to his original book, because originally the use of the term paradigm was not clearly defined. Besides this definition Kuhn mentioned another sense of use he had: a Paradigm also “denotes one sort of element in that constellation, the concrete puzzle-solutions which, employed as models or examples, can replace explicit rules as a basis for the solution of the remaining puzzles of normal science” [Ibid]. The term remains imprecise due to the different uses it is given.

Paradigms could be described from a structural perspective. Paradigms operate on different levels; the macro, meso and micro levels of the paradigm's structure. The levels address the fundamental structure of the paradigms, rather than its chronological-historical categorization or the etymological use, as used by most disciplines. The levels of paradigms are always present and not limited to these categories. They assist in an understanding of the functioning of a paradigm.

In the ''macro''' level, a cognizance of the basic assumption to the question: ‘what can be understood’ is required. The question is: "Can it in reality be assumed that the essences of ideal things could be known at all, as in Plato's and Aristotle's use of the theory of ideas? Besides the essentialistic approaches of these two philosophers, is it not possible that "the things themselves reveal themselves as they are", analysed in Heidegger's fundamental ontology? The assumption we make in answering these questions will predispose the perception that determines the way we ask the question about how we come to knowledge.

In the ''meso'' level, the question is how the macro level influences and forms the resulting theory of knowledge. “Is only deductive-delimited knowledge of human perception available to man, or is man open to an inductive-comprehensive understanding of the world?”. If man is open to inductive knowledge, where does it originate? The assumption on the macro level is the basis for this assumption. All philosophical efforts since the pre-socratics are essentialistic. An ontological approach seeks to evade the essences of things, requiring the things themselves to reveal them as they are. 