250px|right|thumb|Slika Kovčega Saveza koji se unosi u Salomonov hram

"'''Kovčeg Saveza'''" ili "'''Zavjetni kovčeg'''" (Bibliji  kao sveti kovčeg koji sadrži kamene ploče sa Božjoj zapovijedi a upute za izgradnju je dao Židovima. Tijekom putovanja Izraelaca, kovčeg su nosili svečenici te su ga omotali maramama kako bi ga sakrili od očiju ljudi.

== Opis ==

Biblija opisuje da je kovčeg napravljen od bagrema ili od neke druge vrste drveta. Bio je širok i visok ''kubit'' i pol (u egipatskoj kulturi jedan kubit je bio oko 52 cm) te dugačak dva i pol kubita (dakle dimenzija 114 puta 68 puta 68 cm). Kovčeg je bio prekriven sa najčiščim zlatom. Poklopac je bio prekriven sa kolutom zlata. Na svakoj strani bila su po dva zlatna prstena u koje su položena dva drvena štapa kako bi se kovčeg mogao nositi. Iznad kovčega su bila dva kipa anđela koja su gledala jedan prema drugome.

Prema Bibliji dvije kamene ploče sa izjavom kao dokazom Božjeg saveza sa ljudima su bile pohranjene u kovčegu. Zlatna zdjela koja je sadržavala dijelove mane od Izraelaca te plemena Juda, te od '''Aholiaba''', sina ''Ahisamaha'' od plemena Dan. No prema drugim izvorima Mojsije je već unaprijed izgradio kovčeg prije nego se popeo na planinu Sinaja kako bi dobio drugi set ploča.  

== Povijest ==

250px|left|thumb|Osvajanje grada [[Jerihona]]

Pri dugom putovanju kroz Sinaj i prelasku Kani, kovčeg je ostao u nekom šatoru kraj '''Gilgala''' neko vrijeme, a zatim premiješten u '''Shiloh''' tijekom vladavine '''Elija''', kada je tijekom bitke otet od Filestinaca. Kada je to čuo Eli, umro je od šoka. Filestinci su odveli kovčeg na više mjesta po njihovoj zemlji, a na svakom mjestu ih je dočekala neka nesreća – tako ih je u Ashdodu snašla bolest, a kada su kovčeg stavili u hram boga ''Dagona'', njegov kip je ujutro pronađen kako se klanja njemu, a idučeg jutra kako je razbijen. Nakon sedam mjeseci, Filestinci su na kraju odlučili vratiti ga Hebrejcima. Natrag u njihovom vlasništvu, Hebrejci su ga stavili u kuću Abinadaba u ''Kirjat-jearimu''.

Tijekom vladavine kralja Davida, kovčeg je uklonjen od ''Kirjat-jearima''. Na putu prema Zionu, jedan od vozača kola koje su vukle kovčeg je stavio ruku na njega te je preminuo za kaznu od Boga. David je u strahu kovčeg odnio u kuću '''Obed-edoma''', gdje je ostao tri mjeseca. Kada je kovčeg donio blagostanje u kuću, odnio ga je u Zion, gdje je pripremio žrtve, hranu i blagoslovio građane. Htio je izgraditi hram za njega, ali mu je Bog savjetovao da to ne učini.  	

Kamene ploče sa zapovijedima su stavljene u kovčeg prije nego što su od kralja Salomona ostavljene u Jeruzalemov hram. Salomon je štovao kovčeg zbog sna u kojem mu je Bog obečao mudrost. Kada je stavljen u sveti hram, po legendi je tajnoviti oblak napunio prostorije. Kada su Babilonci uništili Jeruzalem i opljačkali hram 587. g. p. k, kovčeg je ušao u teritorij legende. Vjerojatno ili uništen ili odnjet od Nebukadnezera.

== Sadašnje moguče lokacije ==

Neki pojedinci tvrde da su pronašli kovčeg, ali to još nije potvrđeno. 1989. '''Ron Wyatt''' je objavio da je ušao u komoru dok je kopao ispod planine Moriah te naišao na kovčeg, ali su mu fotografije koje je slikao ispale mutne, što je povečalo skepticizam prema njegovim tvrdnjama. Wyatt se smatra arheologom koji traži pozornost javnosti te koji često tvrdi da posjeduje važne objekte koje ne posjeduje. I '''Vendyl Jones''' je tvrdio da je pronašao kovčeg u Kumranu te da će ga pokazati javnosti, ali to se nije dogodilo. 

thumb|246px|right|A late 19th-century artist's conception of the Ark of the Covenant, employing a Renaissance [[cassone for the Ark and cherubim as latter-day Christian angels.]] 
The '''Ark of the Covenant''' (Hebrew: אָרוֹן הָבְרִית ''ʔārōn hāb’rīθ'', Modern ''aron habrit'') is described in the Mount Sinai ().  God communicated with Moses "from between the two cherubim" on the Ark's cover (). The Ark and its sanctuary were "the beauty of Israel" (). Rashi and some Midrashim suggest that there were two arks - a temporary one made by Moses, and a later one made by Bezalel.<ref name="autogenerated1">Hertz 1936</ref>

The Biblical account relates that during the trip of the Israelites, the Ark was carried by the priests ~2,000 Numbers 35:5; Joshua 4:5) in advance of the people and their army or host (Num. 4:5-6; 10:33-36; Jordan, the river was separated, opening a pathway for the whole of the host to pass over (Josh. 3:15-16; 4:7-18). The Ark was borne in a seven-day procession around the wall of rams' horns, the city taken with a shout (Josh. 6:4-20). When carried, the Ark was always wrapped in a veil, in tachash skins (the identity of this animal is uncertain), and a blue cloth, and was carefully concealed, even from the eyes of the Levites who carried it.

==Terminology==
thumb|Transporting the Ark of the Covenant: gilded brass-relief at the [[Auch Cathedral]]
The Hebrew word ''aron'' is used in the Bible to refer to any type of ark, chest or coffer, for any purpose (2 Kings 12:9, 10).

The Ark of the Covenant is distinguished from all others by such titles as: 
*Holy Ark
*Ark of God, (1 Samuel 3:3)
*Ark of thy God's strength
*Ark of the Covenant, (Josh. 3:6; Hebrews 9:4)
*Ark of the Covenant of the Lord of all the Earth
*Ark of the Testimony, (Ex. 25:22)

==Description==
The Bible describes the Ark as made of Tree of Life and an important plant in traditional medicine containing in many cases psychoactive alkaloids. It was a cubit and a half broad and high, and two and a half cubits long (about 130 cm x 78 cm x 78 cm or 4.29 x 2.57 x 2.57 feet, for Egyptian royal cubit was most likely used). The Ark was covered all over with the purest gold. Its upper surface or lid, the mercy seat (), was surrounded with a rim of gold.

On each of the two sides were two gold rings, wherein were placed two wooden poles (with a decorative sheathing of gold), to allow the Ark to be carried (Num. 7:9; 10:21; 4:5,19, 20; 1 Kings 8:3, 6). Over the Ark, at the two extremities, were two Holy of Holies," so that one end of the carrying poles touched the veil separating the two compartments of the tabernacle (1 Kings 8:8). The Book of Deuteronomy describes the Ark as a simple wooden container with no mention of ornaments or gold. Similarly, the Quran makes a reference to the Ark as a wooden box with holy relics inside it.

===Contents===
According to the Bible, the two tablets of stone constituting the "testimony" or evidence of God's covenant with the people (i.e. The Ten Commandments) were kept within the Ark itself. A golden jar containing some of the ''manna'' from the Israelites' trek in the wilderness, and the rod of Aaron that budded, were added to the contents of the Ark (Ex. 16:32-34; Heb. 9:4), but apparently were later removed at some point prior to the building of Solomon's temple, as the Tanakh states in I Kings 8:9 that there "was nothing in the Ark save the two tablets of stone." While Heb. 9:4 states these items were placed "inside" the Ark, Ex. 16:33-34 and Num. 17:10 use the expression "before" the Ark; some see a contradiction here, as the correct meaning of these phrases is open to interpretation. A Rabbinic tradition states that Moses also put the broken fragments of the first tablets of the Law into the Ark.<ref name="autogenerated1" />

===Sanctity and consecration===
Even High Priest, was forbidden to enter the place of the Ark, except once per Uri of the tribe of Judah, and by Aholiab, the son of Ahisamach of the tribe of Dan (Ex. 31:2-7). These instructions Moses carried out, calling upon every "wisehearted" one among the people to assist in the work (Ex. 35:10-12). Bezalel the artist made the Ark (Ex. 37:1); and Moses approved the work, put the testimony in the Ark, and installed it.

According to the Haggadah written in the Mishnaic and Talmudic periods (''circa'' 200-500 CE), after installment in the second Temple, the Ark and the operation of the Temple was supervised by the angel Metatron. There are numerous possible etymologies for the name Metatron, one being from two Greek words  ''after'' and ''throne''.  There are no references to Metatron in the Jewish Tanakh (Old Testament), the Christian Scriptures (New Testament) or any Islamic source.

In Deut. 10:1-5, a different account of the making of the Ark is given. Moses is made to say that he constructed the Ark before going upon Mount Horeb to receive the second set of tablets. The charge of carrying the Ark and the rest of the holy implements was given to the family of Kohath (of the tribe of Levi). They, though, were not to touch any of the holy things that were still uncovered by Aaron (Num. 4:2-15).

==Other references to the Ark in Scripture==
The Ark of the Covenant is mentioned in both the Bible and the Qur'an.

===In the Bible===
180px|thumb|The Ark carried into the Temple

The Ark is mentioned in the books Joshua, Exodus, Deuteronomy, Hebrews and Jeremiah. It is referenced by Jeremiah, who, speaking in the days of Josiah (Jer. 3:16), prophesies a future time when the Ark will no longer be used. In the Psalms, the Ark is twice referred to. In Ps. 78:61 its capture by the Philistines is spoken of, and the Ark is called "the strength and glory of God"; and in Ps. 132:8, it is spoken of as "You and the ark of Your strength."  The Ark is also mentioned in several passages in Exodus and 1 Samuel, including Exodus 25:10-22 and 1 Samuel 4:3-22 and 5:7-8.
The Ark is mentioned in one passage in the deuterocanonical 2 Maccabees 2:4-10, which contains a reference to a document saying that the prophet Jeremiah, "being warned of God," took the Ark, and the tabernacle, and the altar of incense, and buried them in a cave on Mount Nebo (Deut. 34:1), informing those of his followers who wished to find the place that it should remain unknown "until the time that God should gather His people again together, and receive them unto mercy." Hebrews 9:4 states that the Ark contained "the golden pot that had ''manna'', and Aaron's rod that budded, and the tables of the covenant." Finally, in the Book of Revelation the Ark is described as being in the 'temple' of God in heaven (Rev. 11:19). The Ark is last seen in God's 'temple' just before a woman gives birth to the man child (Rev. 12:1-2), both stalked by a dragon and his angels cast to earth (Rev. 12:3-17).

===In the Qur'an===
There is a brief mention of the Ark of the Covenant in Islamic literature. This mention is in the middle of the narrative of the choice of Saul to be king. The Qur'an states:
)}}

Islamic scholar Al Baidawi mentions that the ''Qisas Al-Anbiya (The Stories of the Prophets), has given an earlier and later history of the Ark.

According to most Muslim scholars, the Ark of the Covenant has a religious basis in Islam, and Islam gives it special significance. Muslims believe that it will be found by end of times from Lake Tiberias.<ref>Iqd al-Durar fi Akbar al-Imam al-Muntadhar, by Shaikh Jamaluddin Yusuf al Damishqi, p. 51-a</ref>

==Biblical account==
===Mobile vanguard===
In the march from Sinai, and at the crossing of the Jordan, the Ark preceded the people, and was the signal for their advance (Num. 10:33; Josh. 3:3, 6). The Ark of the Covenant burned the thorns and other obstructions in the wilderness roads. According to tradition, sparks from between the two cherubim killed serpents and twelve stones were taken from the Jordan at the place where the priests had stood (Josh. 4:1-9). 

The Ark was carried into battle, such as in the Ai, Joshua lamented before the Ark (Josh. 7:6-9). When Joshua read the Law to the people between Shiloh; but when the Israelites fought against Benjamin at Gibeah, they had the Ark with them, and consulted it after their defeat.

===Captured by the Philistines===
The Ark is next spoken of as being in the tabernacle at Shiloh during Samuel's apprenticeship (1 Sam. 3:3). After the settlement of the Eli, between 300 and 400 years (Jeremiah 7:12), when it was carried into the field of battle, so as to secure, as they supposed, victory to the Hebrews; and it was taken by the Philistines (1 Sam. 4:3-11), who sent it back after retaining it seven months (1 Sam. 5:7, 8) because of the events said to have transpired. After their first defeat at Eben-ezer, the Israelites had the Ark brought from Shiloh, and welcomed its coming with great rejoicing. 

In the second battle, the Israelites were again defeated, and the Philistines captured the Ark (1 Sam. 4:3-5, 10, 11). The news of its capture was at once taken to Shiloh by a messenger "with his clothes rent, and with earth upon his head." The old priest, Eli, fell dead when he heard it; and his daughter-in-law, bearing a son at the time the news of the capture of the Ark was received, named him Ichabod—explained as "Where is glory?" in reference to the loss of the Ark (1 Sam. 4:12-22).

The Philistines took the Ark to several places in their country, and at each place misfortune resulted to them (1 Sam. 5:1-6). At Gath and of Ekron, whither the Ark was successively removed (1 Sam. 5:8-12).

After the Ark had been among them seven months, the Philistines, on the advice of their diviners, returned it to the Israelites, accompanying its return with an offering consisting of golden images of the hemorrhoids and mice wherewith they had been afflicted. The Ark was set in the field of Joshua the Beth-shemite, and the Beth-shemites offered sacrifices and burnt offerings (1 Sam. 6:1-15). Out of curiosity the men of 1 Chronicles 13:3 it is stated that the people were not accustomed to consult the Ark in the days of Saul.

===In the days of King David===
At the beginning of his reign, David removed the Ark from Kirjath-jearim amid great rejoicing. On the way to Gittite, instead of carrying it on to Zion, and here it stayed three months (2 Sam. 6:1-11; 1 Chron. 13:1-13).

On hearing that the Lord had blessed Obed-edom because of the presence of the Ark in his house, David had the Ark brought to Zion by the Levites, while he himself, "girded with a linen ephod," "danced before the Lord with all his might" — a performance that caused him to be despised and scornfully rebuked by Saul's daughter Michal (2 Sam. 6:12-16, 20-22; 1 Chron. 15). This derision of David on her part prompted God to take away her fertility. In Zion, David put the Ark in the tabernacle he had prepared for it, offered sacrifices, distributed food, and blessed the people and his own household (2 Sam. 6:17-20; 1 Chron. 16:1-3; 2 Chron. 1:4).

Levites were appointed to minister before the Ark (1 Chron. 16:4).  David's plan of building a temple for the Ark was stopped at the advice of God (2 Sam. 7:1-17; 1 Chron. 17:1-15; 28:2, 3).  The Ark was with the army during the siege of Zadok the priest to return it to Jerusalem (2 Sam. 15:24-29).

===In Solomon's temple===
When conspiracy against David, his life was spared because he had formerly borne the Ark (1 Kings 2:26). It was afterwards placed by Solomon in the temple (1 Kings 8:6-9). Solomon worshiped before the Ark after his dream in which the Lord promised him wisdom (1 Kings 3:15). In Solomon's Temple, a Holy of Holies was prepared to receive the Ark (1 Kings 6:19); and when the Temple was dedicated, the Ark&mdash;containing nothing but the two Mosaic tables of stone&mdash;was placed therein. When the priests emerged from the holy place after placing the Ark there, the Temple was filled with a cloud, "for the glory of the Lord had filled the house of the Lord" (1 Kings 8:10-11; 2 Chron. 5:13, 14). 

When Solomon married Pharaoh's daughter, he caused her to dwell in a house outside Zion, as Zion was consecrated because of its containing the Ark (2 Chron. 8:11). King Josiah had the Ark put into the Temple (2 Chron. 35:3), whence it appears to have again been removed by one of his successors.

===The Babylonians and afterwards===
thumb|280px|Area believed to be the place where the Ark of the Covenant sat before King Solomon's Temple was destroyed. A dome was later built by the Arabs who now refer to it as the [[Dome of Spirits.]]

When the Nebuchadnezzar and destroyed. The absence of the ark from the Second Temple was acknowledged. The Ark is finally re-established to the Temple in vision: "Then God's temple in heaven was opened, and within his temple was seen the Ark of his Covenant" (Rev. 11:19 NIV).

==Fate of the Ark==

Guesses of the ultimate fate of the Ark include the intentional concealing of the Ark under the Temple Mount; the removal of the Ark from Jerusalem in advance of the Babylonians (this variant usually ends up with the Ark in Ethiopia); the removal of the Ark by the Ethiopian prince Menelik I (purported son of King Solomon and the Queen of Sheba); removal by Jewish priests during the reign of Manasseh of Judah, possibly taken to the Jewish Temple at Elephantine in Egypt; the miraculous removal of the Ark by divine intervention (Cf. 2 Chronicles); and even the destruction of the original ornate Ark under King Josiah's reforms (when it may have been seen as violating the commandment against graven images) and replacement with a simple wooden box, easily lost when the Temple fell.

==Rumoured present locations==
Some have claimed to have discovered or have possession of the Ark.