'''Cadence Records''' was an American ARC in 1934 and 1935 (his records were issued on Vocalion, Melotone, Perfect and Romeo). 

The first recording star for Cadence was Godfrey alumnus Julius La Rosa. Other Godfrey alumnae signed to the label included the Chordettes. According to legend, Bleyer was fired from the Godfrey show when he signed someone Godfrey regarded as a rival to a record deal. (Ironically, Godfrey later fired singer Julius La Rosa in October 1954, causing a storm of controversy at the time.) The label also produced the early hits of Andy Williams and The Everly Brothers, as well as Johnny Tillotson. Virtuoso jazz/classical pianist Donald Shirley was signed with Cadence in the 50's and 60's. Candid Records was the company's short-lived jazz subsidiary.

Cadence had nearly 100 charted American singles during the 1950s and into the 1960s. It produced the 1962 smash bestseller parody album, "The First Family" by Vaughn Meader, which was, to that time, the fastest-selling album in history, featuring hilarious impressions of President John F. Kennedy, wife Jackie Kennedy, as well as newsmakers like Nikita Kruschev and vice-president Hubert Humphrey. A follow-up album released in March of 1963 did not do as well, and shortly thereafter, the two albums were taken out of print, following the assassination of Kennedy in Dallas. The departures of the Everly Brothers in 1960 (to Warner Bros. Records) and of Andy Williams in 1961 (to Columbia Records), along with radical changes in public taste and the music business brought on by the 1964 British invasion, led to the decline of the company by 1964. Bleyer opted to shut down Cadence, and sold Williams' masters to the singer, which he bought mainly because he wanted to keep Cadence from reissuing his old material in competition with his new material. Bleyer wanted Williams to buy the entire Cadence catalogue which he did. Williams reissued his old albums on Columbia and formed Barnaby Records to manage the Cadence catalogue.

'''Cadence Records''' war eine US-amerikanische Schallplattenfirma mit Sitz in New York. Sie wurde 1952 von Archie Bleyer gegründet, der zuvor musikalischer Leiter und Bandleader bei Arthur Godfreys Talentshows war.

Erster Plattenstar bei ''Cadence'' war Godfreys Single ''„Anywhere I Wander“'', welche auch die erste ''Cadence''-Veröffentlichung war, kam in die Top 30, die dritte La-Rosa-Single ''„Eh, Cumpari“'' (1953) wurde ein Nummer-Eins-Hit in den Hitparaden des ''Cash Box Magazine'' und Platz zwei in den Billboard-Charts. 

Andere Künstler, die in Godfreys Shows auftraten, schlossen sich Bleyers Plattenlabel an, darunter die Chordettes. ''Cadence'' produzierte auch die frühen Hits von Everly Brothers. Johnny Tillotson wurde ebenfalls einer der Stars der Plattenfirma. Auch Pianist Donald Shirley war in den 1950ern und 1960ern bei ''Cadence'' unter Vertrag. Kurzzeitig hatte die Plattenfirma auch ein spezielles Label für Jazzproduktionen namens ''Candid Records''.

''Cadence'' produzierte in den 1950er und 1960er Jahren viele Hit-Schallplatten, darunter den US-Bestseller ''„The First Family“'', eine Parodie des Komikers und Imitators Vaughn Meader auf die Familie des US-Präsidenten John F. Kennedy. Innerhalb von zwei Monaten nach seiner Veröffentlichung im Oktober 1962 wurde das Album eine Million Mal verkauft, damals ein Rekord; bis zum Ende des folgenden Jahres waren 7,5 Millionen Exemplare über die Ladentische gegangen. 